OBLIVINX3X
Experimental Embedded Document Database Engine

Technical Architecture Specification

─────────────────────────────────────

.OVN Storage Format  •  Hybrid B+/LSM Indexing  •  MVCC Concurrency

Designed for: Embedded Systems  •  Serverless  •  Edge Computing  •  Microservices


Version 1.1.0 — Architecture Draft (Updated: MongoDB Feature Integration)

Classification: Internal Technical Reference

Table of Contents
Table of Contents	2
Section 1 — Ecosystem Analysis	6
1.1 Document Databases	6
1.1.1 MongoDB	6
1.1.2 CouchDB	7
1.1.3 ArangoDB	7
1.1.4 Firestore	8
1.2 Key-Value Databases	8
1.2.1 Redis	8
1.2.2 DynamoDB	9
1.2.3 RocksDB	9
1.3 Column-Family Databases	9
1.3.1 Apache Cassandra	10
1.3.2 Apache HBase	10
1.3.3 ScyllaDB	10
1.4 Graph Databases	11
1.4.1 Neo4j	11
1.5 Embedded Databases	11
1.5.1 SQLite	11
1.5.2 LevelDB	12
1.5.3 Realm (MongoDB Realm / Atlas Device SDK)	12
Section 2 — Gap Discovery	14
Gap 1 — Absence of an Embedded Native Document Database	14
Gap 2 — Write Amplification in B-tree Embedded Stores	14
Gap 3 — Inefficient Compound and Partial Field Indexing	14
Gap 4 — Memory Pressure in Mixed Read/Write Workloads	15
Gap 5 — Lack of Transactional Document Updates in LSM-Based Stores	15
Section 3 — Design Goals for Oblivinx3x	16
3.1 Target Deployment Environments	16
Section 4 — Oblivinx3x Core Architecture	18
4.1 System Layer Diagram	18
4.2 The Adaptive Hybrid Index Tree (AHIT) — Architectural Innovation	18
4.3 Storage Engine Layer	19
4.4 Document Layer	19
4.5 MVCC Transaction Layer	19
4.6 Query Engine Layer	19
Section 5 — .OVN Database File Format	20
5.1 File Header (Page 0 — Always 4096 bytes)	20
5.2 Segment Layout	20
5.3 Page Layout	21
5.4 OVN Binary Encoding Format	21
5.5 Compression	22
Section 6 — Write Path Micro Process	23
Section 7 — Read Path Micro Process	26
Section 8 — Indexing System	28
8.1 Primary Document Index	28
8.2 Secondary Indexes	28
8.3 Compound Indexes and the Skip-Column Optimization	28
8.4 Full-Text Index	28
8.4.1 Fuzzy Matching	29
8.4.2 Autocomplete Index	29
8.5 Optional Vector Index (ANN Search)	29
8.6 AHIT Hot Zone / Cold Zone Promotion	29
8.7 Geospatial Index [NEW]	30
Section 9 — Memory Management	31
Section 10 — Concurrency Control	32
10.1 MVCC Implementation	32
10.2 Snapshot Isolation	32
10.3 Optimistic Concurrency Control	32
10.4 Lock-Free Read Strategy	32
10.5 Write Conflict Resolution	33
10.6 Retryable Writes [NEW]	33
Section 11 — Background Systems	34
Section 12 — Optional Distributed Extension	36
Section 13 — Library API Design	37
13.1 Database Lifecycle	37
13.2 Collection Management	37
13.3 Document CRUD Operations	38
13.4 Indexing API	39
13.5 Transactions	40
13.6 Aggregation Pipeline	40
13.7 Change Streams [NEW]	42
Section 14 — Performance Expectations	43
Section 15 — Production Readiness	44
Section 16 — Implementation Roadmap	46
Appendix A — Glossary	49
Appendix B — .OVN File Format Quick Reference	50
Appendix C — Supported MQL Operators	51


Section 1 — Ecosystem Analysis
This section provides a comprehensive architectural analysis of modern database systems across all major paradigms. Each system is examined through the lens of its storage engine, indexing design, query execution, transaction model, and concurrency strategy. This analysis forms the empirical foundation from which the Oblivinx3x architecture is derived.

1.1 Document Databases
1.1.1 MongoDB
Storage Engine:
MongoDB's default storage engine is WiredTiger, which replaced the legacy MMAP engine in version 3.2. WiredTiger uses a write-ahead log (WAL) combined with a B-tree-based page structure organized into checkpoints. Data files are divided into internal pages, leaf pages, and overflow pages. Each collection lives in its own .wt file and each index also occupies a dedicated file.
Disk Layout:
On disk, MongoDB organizes data in a data/ directory containing the WiredTiger files, a journal/ directory for WAL records, and a WiredTiger.wt meta-file. Documents are stored in BSON (Binary JSON) encoding, a superset of JSON that adds binary types, ObjectId, Date, and 32/64-bit integers. BSON is length-prefixed, allowing O(1) document-length reads.
Indexing Structures:
MongoDB uses a B-tree for all index types: single-field, compound, multikey (arrays), text, geospatial, and hashed. Indexes are stored as separate B-tree structures on disk. The _id index is always created and is a unique B-tree. Secondary indexes store the index key plus the document's _id pointer. Covered queries can be satisfied entirely from the index without fetching the document.
Query Engine:
MongoDB's query engine uses a multi-stage pipeline. The query planner evaluates candidate plans using a cost-based model and races plans in parallel during the 'trial period'. After plan selection, the winning plan is cached. The aggregation pipeline processes stages (match, group, project, sort, lookup) sequentially using a streaming model.
Transaction Model:
Starting from MongoDB 4.0, multi-document ACID transactions are supported. WiredTiger provides snapshot isolation at the storage level using MVCC. Each operation sees a consistent snapshot. Distributed transactions were added in 4.2. Transactions use pessimistic locking at the document level, with automatic deadlock detection.
Concurrency Control:
WiredTiger uses optimistic concurrency with document-level locking. Collection-level intent locks and database-level intent locks form the lock hierarchy. Readers do not block writers at the document level due to MVCC. The lock manager is ticket-based, with configurable read/write tickets to prevent thread starvation.
Strengths:
•	Mature and feature-rich document model with nested arrays and objects.
•	Rich aggregation pipeline for complex analytics.
•	Atlas cloud integration with horizontal scaling via sharding.
•	Change streams for real-time event processing.
•	GridFS for storing files larger than the 16MB document limit.
•	Time-series collections with automatic bucketing for IoT and metrics workloads.
•	Retryable writes for transparent driver-level operation retry.
•	Geospatial 2dsphere indexes with full GeoJSON support.
Weaknesses:
•	High memory footprint — WiredTiger uses a 50% RAM cache by default.
•	Not suitable for embedded deployment due to system dependency and large binary size (~300MB+).
•	Write amplification from B-tree page splits and journaling.
•	Schema-less model can lead to inconsistency in large teams without validation.

1.1.2 CouchDB
Storage Engine:
CouchDB uses an append-only B-tree structure called the 'couch file format'. All writes are appended to the end of the .couch file, and the B-tree root pointer is updated atomically. This eliminates in-place update complexity and makes crash recovery trivial — simply truncate to the last valid root. Compaction rewrites the file to reclaim space from stale revisions.
Disk Layout:
Each database is stored in a single .couch file. The file contains a sequence of 4KB blocks. Document bodies, B-tree nodes, and header records all share the same file. The header is written every 100KB or on checkpoint, storing the B-tree root offsets for the main index and the by-sequence index.
Indexing:
CouchDB provides MapReduce views for secondary indexing. Views are defined as JavaScript functions and stored as design documents. The view index is a B-tree built incrementally as documents are updated. Mango queries (introduced in 2.x) use a Mango selector syntax backed by Cloudant Query indexes.
Strengths:
•	Excellent offline-first synchronization model via the Couch Replication Protocol.
•	Append-only storage provides natural crash safety without WAL.
•	HTTP/REST native API — any HTTP client can interact directly.
Weaknesses:
•	MapReduce views are expensive to build and require JavaScript execution.
•	No join or relational query support.
•	Slow compaction on large datasets.

1.1.3 ArangoDB
Storage Engine:
ArangoDB uses RocksDB as its storage backend since version 3.4. RocksDB's LSM-tree structure gives ArangoDB efficient write throughput. Before 3.4, ArangoDB used its own MMFiles engine (memory-mapped files), which was deprecated due to performance limitations on large datasets.
Multi-Model Design:
ArangoDB is a native multi-model database supporting documents, key-value pairs, and graphs within a single engine and query language (AQL). This unified approach reduces infrastructure complexity but adds internal abstraction layers that can introduce overhead compared to dedicated systems.
Strengths:
•	Single system for documents, key-value, and graphs.
•	Powerful AQL with JOIN, graph traversal, and full-text search.
•	Cluster mode with Raft-based consensus.
Weaknesses:
•	Complexity of multi-model abstraction increases memory and CPU overhead.
•	RocksDB tuning required for optimal performance.

1.1.4 Firestore
Architecture:
Google Firestore is a fully managed, serverless document database built on Bigtable infrastructure. Documents are organized into collections and sub-collections. Firestore uses a distributed, strongly consistent storage layer with automatic multi-region replication. The query engine uses composite indexes that must be pre-defined for non-trivial queries.
Strengths:
•	Real-time document listeners with SDK support.
•	Automatic horizontal scaling — no cluster management.
•	Strong consistency with multi-region replication.
Weaknesses:
•	Vendor lock-in with no self-hosted option.
•	Complex pricing model based on document reads/writes/deletes.
•	Cannot run embedded or offline without Firebase emulator.

1.2 Key-Value Databases
1.2.1 Redis
Storage Engine:
Redis operates as a primarily in-memory data structure store. The entire dataset lives in RAM with optional persistence via RDB (snapshot) and AOF (append-only file). RDB creates point-in-time snapshots using fork-based copy-on-write. AOF logs every write command and can be replayed on restart. Redis 7.0 introduced a log-structured RDB format for faster recovery.
Data Structures:
Redis exposes strings, hashes, lists, sets, sorted sets, bitmaps, hyperloglogs, streams, and geospatial indexes as first-class primitives. Each data structure has O(1) or O(log N) operations. The sorted set uses a skip list combined with a hash table for dual-access patterns.
Strengths:
•	Sub-millisecond latency for read/write operations due to in-memory architecture.
•	Rich data structure support beyond simple key-value.
•	Pub/Sub and Stream primitives for messaging.
Weaknesses:
•	Dataset size limited by available RAM.
•	Persistence mechanisms (RDB/AOF) are complex to tune correctly.
•	Clustering (Redis Cluster) adds operational overhead and query routing complexity.

1.2.2 DynamoDB
Architecture:
DynamoDB is Amazon's fully managed, multi-active, multi-region key-value and document store. It uses consistent hashing to partition data across storage nodes. Each partition stores B-tree pages (SSDs). The request router maps partition keys to storage nodes. DynamoDB uses Paxos for leader election within each partition group.
Strengths:
•	Single-digit millisecond latency at any scale.
•	Auto-scaling partitions without manual sharding.
•	Transactional APIs (TransactWrite, TransactGet) for ACID guarantees.
Weaknesses:
•	Hot partition problem when access patterns are skewed.
•	Secondary index updates are eventually consistent (GSI).
•	Limited query flexibility — full table scans are expensive.

1.2.3 RocksDB
Storage Engine:
RocksDB is an embedded key-value store developed by Facebook, based on LevelDB. It uses an LSM-tree (Log-Structured Merge-tree) as its primary storage structure. Writes go first to an in-memory MemTable, then to SSTable files on disk arranged in levels (L0 through Ln). Compaction merges and sorts SSTables across levels, eliminating tombstones and duplicate keys.
Compaction Strategies:
RocksDB supports Leveled Compaction (default), FIFO Compaction, and Universal Compaction. Leveled compaction maintains size ratios between levels, providing predictable read amplification. Universal compaction optimizes for write amplification at the cost of higher temporary space usage.
Strengths:
•	Extremely high write throughput due to sequential disk writes.
•	Tunable read/write/space amplification trade-offs.
•	Column families allow logical data separation within a single instance.
•	Used as the backend for Kafka, MySQL (MyRocks), CockroachDB, and TiKV.
Weaknesses:
•	Read amplification: worst case requires checking all levels.
•	Compaction causes I/O spikes and can affect tail latency.
•	No native document model — requires additional serialization layer.

1.3 Column-Family Databases
1.3.1 Apache Cassandra
Storage Engine:
Cassandra uses a log-structured storage engine based on the Bigtable paper. Writes go to a commit log (WAL) and a MemTable. When the MemTable reaches its size threshold, it is flushed to disk as an immutable SSTable. SSTables are compacted using either Size-Tiered Compaction (STCS), Leveled Compaction (LCS), or Time-Window Compaction (TWCS). Each SSTable contains a data file, an index file, a bloom filter, and a compression information file.
Data Model:
Cassandra's data model is a wide-column store. A table (formerly called a column family) has a partition key, optional clustering columns, and regular columns. Rows within a partition are stored sorted by clustering columns. This model enables efficient time-series queries and ordered range scans within a partition.
Replication:
Cassandra uses a masterless ring topology with consistent hashing. Tokens are assigned to nodes (or vnodes) around the ring. Data is replicated to N nodes based on the replication factor. The coordinator node handles client requests and routes to the appropriate replicas using the configured partitioner (Murmur3 by default).
Strengths:
•	Excellent write throughput due to sequential disk writes.
•	Linear horizontal scalability with no single point of failure.
•	Tunable consistency (ANY, ONE, QUORUM, ALL) per operation.
Weaknesses:
•	No support for arbitrary secondary indexes (must denormalize data).
•	Read paths involving non-partition-key queries require SAI or ALLOW FILTERING.
•	Operational complexity — compaction, repair, and GC tuning require expertise.

1.3.2 Apache HBase
Architecture:
HBase is a distributed column-family store built on top of HDFS, modeled after Google Bigtable. The master server manages RegionServers, which hold the actual data regions. Each region is a contiguous range of row keys stored in HFiles (an SSTable format). WAL is per-RegionServer and stored in HDFS.
Strengths:
•	Strong consistency with linearizable reads and writes per row.
•	Excellent integration with the Hadoop ecosystem (Spark, MapReduce).
•	Efficient storage of sparse data — only non-null cells are stored.
Weaknesses:
•	Requires a full Hadoop/HDFS/ZooKeeper stack — massive operational overhead.
•	No secondary index support natively — requires Phoenix or Hive.
•	High latency for small reads due to RPC overhead to RegionServers.

1.3.3 ScyllaDB
Architecture:
ScyllaDB is a C++ reimplementation of Cassandra designed for modern hardware. It uses a shared-nothing architecture with one shard per CPU core. Each shard manages its own MemTables, SSTables, and compaction. The Seastar framework provides asynchronous I/O without thread blocking, eliminating context-switch overhead. ScyllaDB achieves 10-20x higher throughput than Cassandra on equivalent hardware.
Strengths:
•	Near-zero garbage collection overhead (C++ native).
•	Per-core scheduling eliminates cross-core lock contention.
•	Cassandra-compatible CQL API.
Weaknesses:
•	Same data model limitations as Cassandra.
•	Operational expertise from Cassandra does not fully transfer.

1.4 Graph Databases
1.4.1 Neo4j
Storage Engine:
Neo4j uses a native graph storage format optimized for graph traversal. Nodes, relationships, and properties are stored in separate fixed-size store files: neostore.nodestore.db, neostore.relationshipstore.db, and neostore.propertystore.db. Each node record is 15 bytes and stores pointers to its first relationship and first property. Relationship records form a doubly-linked list per node, enabling O(1) neighbor lookup without full index scans — a feature called 'index-free adjacency'.
Query Engine:
Neo4j uses the Cypher query language for graph pattern matching. The Cypher planner converts declarative queries into physical execution plans using pattern matching, relationship expansion, and aggregation operators. The APOC (Awesome Procedures on Cypher) library extends Cypher with hundreds of utility procedures.
Strengths:
•	Index-free adjacency makes deep graph traversals extremely fast.
•	Cypher is expressive and readable for graph queries.
•	ACID transactions with native graph semantics.
Weaknesses:
•	Poor scalability for global analytical queries (full graph scans).
•	Not suitable as a general-purpose document store.
•	Memory-intensive for large graphs — relationship chains must fit in memory efficiently.

1.5 Embedded Databases
1.5.1 SQLite
Storage Engine:
SQLite stores an entire database in a single cross-platform file. The file is divided into pages of fixed size (default 4KB, configurable from 512B to 65536B). Each page belongs to a B-tree: one for each table and one for each index. The first page is the database header. SQLite uses a separate WAL file (with -wal and -shm extensions) for write concurrency. The WAL allows readers to continue without blocking writers.
Page Types:
SQLite has five page types: interior B-tree pages (interior table/index nodes), leaf B-tree pages (actual data), overflow pages (for large column values), pointer map pages (for auto-vacuum), and the lock-byte page. The B-tree structure maintains sorted key order, enabling efficient range queries.
Transaction Model:
SQLite supports serializable transactions by default. In WAL mode, multiple readers can proceed concurrently with a single writer without blocking. The WAL is checkpointed periodically. SQLite implements five locking levels: UNLOCKED, SHARED, RESERVED, PENDING, and EXCLUSIVE.
Strengths:
•	Single-file database with zero configuration required.
•	Extremely lightweight — ~700KB library, no external dependencies.
•	Full ACID compliance with WAL mode.
•	Serverless, in-process operation.
•	Used in iOS, Android, Firefox, Chrome, and hundreds of embedded applications.
Weaknesses:
•	No native document model — requires JSON1 extension for JSON queries.
•	Poor performance for concurrent write-heavy workloads (single writer).
•	B-tree storage causes write amplification on random inserts.
•	No built-in replication or multi-node support.

1.5.2 LevelDB
Architecture:
LevelDB is an embedded key-value store developed by Google using the LSM-tree architecture. It provides a simple Get/Put/Delete/Scan API. Writes are batched in a MemTable (a skip list), then flushed to L0 SSTables. Background compaction merges L0 → L1 → L2 SSTables up to 7 levels. LevelDB is the foundation from which RocksDB was forked and extended.
Strengths:
•	Simple, minimal API with high write throughput.
•	Excellent baseline for building higher-level storage abstractions.
Weaknesses:
•	Single-threaded compaction limits performance on multi-core systems.
•	No column families or advanced configuration.
•	No native document model.

1.5.3 Realm (MongoDB Realm / Atlas Device SDK)
Architecture:
Realm is a mobile-first embedded object database. It uses a custom memory-mapped storage format called the Realm Database File Format. Objects are stored directly in memory-mapped pages, enabling zero-copy reads. Realm uses MVCC for concurrency — reads always see a consistent snapshot while writes proceed. The Realm Sync protocol enables automatic synchronization with MongoDB Atlas.
Strengths:
•	Zero-copy reads from memory-mapped files provide extremely fast read access.
•	Native object model — no ORM layer required.
•	Offline-first with sync capabilities.
Weaknesses:
•	Limited query language compared to SQL or MQL.
•	Tight coupling to the MongoDB Atlas ecosystem for sync.
•	Not suitable for server-side embedded use cases.

System	Model	Storage Engine	Embedded	Document Native	Write Amplification
MongoDB	Document	WiredTiger (B-tree)	No	Yes	Moderate
CouchDB	Document	Append-only B-tree	No	Yes	Low
ArangoDB	Multi-model	RocksDB (LSM)	No	Yes	Low
Firestore	Document	Bigtable	No	Yes	N/A (managed)
Redis	Key-Value	In-Memory + AOF/RDB	Partial	No	High (AOF)
RocksDB	Key-Value	LSM-tree	Yes	No	Low
Cassandra	Column-Family	LSM-tree	No	No	Low
Neo4j	Graph	Native graph files	No	No	Moderate
SQLite	Relational	B-tree	Yes	No	Moderate
LevelDB	Key-Value	LSM-tree	Yes	No	Low
Realm	Object	Memory-mapped	Yes	Partial	Low


Section 2 — Gap Discovery
After exhaustive analysis of the systems described in Section 1, we identify five fundamental architectural gaps that no current system fully resolves. These gaps define the opportunity space for Oblivinx3x.

Gap 1 — Absence of an Embedded Native Document Database
The most glaring gap in the ecosystem is the complete absence of a production-grade, embedded document database that can operate without a server process. SQLite solves the embedded relational problem with remarkable elegance, but its document support (via JSON1) is bolted on and does not integrate with the B-tree storage model at a deep level. MongoDB requires a running mongod server process consuming hundreds of megabytes of RAM. Realm is document-adjacent but tightly coupled to the mobile ecosystem and Atlas Sync.
Backend APIs, edge computing workers, serverless functions, IoT firmware, CLI tools, and test harnesses all need a document store that behaves like SQLite — a single file, zero configuration, in-process operation — but with native document semantics including nested objects, array indexing, schema-optional fields, and rich query operators. No such system exists at production quality.
Impact:
•	Developers use SQLite + JSON columns as a workaround, losing query performance.
•	Serverless functions (AWS Lambda, Cloudflare Workers) cannot embed MongoDB.
•	Edge deployments use SQLite with JSON, sacrificing document-oriented indexing.

Gap 2 — Write Amplification in B-tree Embedded Stores
SQLite's B-tree engine suffers from significant write amplification on workloads involving random inserts or updates. When a B-tree leaf page is full, a page split occurs, requiring writes to the leaf page, the new sibling page, and the parent page. For large datasets, this cascades upward. The WAL then records all these page modifications, further amplifying the write footprint. Studies show SQLite write amplification of 5-10x on random insert workloads.
LSM-tree systems like RocksDB resolve write amplification for the initial write path (sequential writes to MemTable and SSTable), but their compaction process introduces a different form of amplification: bytes written during compaction can be 10-30x the original data for leveled compaction strategies. Neither model solves the problem comprehensively — they simply shift it.
Impact:
•	Flash storage (eMMC, NVMe) endurance is degraded by excessive write amplification.
•	Write-heavy embedded workloads on IoT devices reduce hardware lifespan.
•	High-throughput API servers experience tail latency spikes during B-tree splits.

Gap 3 — Inefficient Compound and Partial Field Indexing
Existing document databases implement compound indexes as full-key indexes: all fields in the compound index are concatenated into a single B-tree key. This means that a compound index on (city, age, score) cannot be used for a query filtering only on (age) unless it is the leftmost prefix. MongoDB enforces this 'leftmost prefix rule' for compound indexes, forcing developers to create redundant single-field indexes or restructure queries.
Additionally, none of the analyzed systems implement a truly adaptive index that learns from query patterns and automatically restructures internal nodes to optimize for observed access patterns. All indexes are static structures defined at creation time.
Impact:
•	Proliferation of redundant indexes wastes disk space and slows writes.
•	Developers must deeply understand index prefix rules to avoid full collection scans.
•	No system automatically suggests or builds indexes based on observed queries.

Gap 4 — Memory Pressure in Mixed Read/Write Workloads
MongoDB's WiredTiger cache defaults to 50% of available RAM. On systems with 1GB RAM (typical edge nodes, containers), this means 512MB is reserved for the cache even if the active working set is 50MB. RocksDB's block cache requires manual tuning — under-allocated caches cause excessive disk I/O; over-allocated caches starve the OS page cache.
No existing embedded or lightweight database implements a self-tuning memory manager that dynamically adjusts buffer pool allocation based on working set size, available system memory, and observed hit rates. All systems require manual tuning via configuration parameters.
Impact:
•	Container-deployed databases over-allocate memory, triggering OOM kills.
•	Embedded systems with limited RAM experience degraded performance.
•	Operations teams spend significant time tuning cache parameters for each deployment.

Gap 5 — Lack of Transactional Document Updates in LSM-Based Stores
LSM-tree based stores (RocksDB, LevelDB, Cassandra) provide excellent write throughput but weak transactional semantics for multi-document or multi-key operations. RocksDB's WriteBatch provides atomicity for a batch but not isolation — concurrent readers may see partial writes. Full serializable transactions in RocksDB require an external transaction coordinator (as used in TiKV with Percolator).
B-tree stores (SQLite, MongoDB) provide good transaction semantics but suffer from write amplification and concurrency limitations. A hybrid architecture that combines LSM-tree write performance with B-tree transactional guarantees does not exist in a lightweight, embeddable form.
Impact:
•	Applications requiring ACID guarantees are forced to use heavy MongoDB or SQLite.
•	RocksDB-based systems require significant additional engineering for transactions.
•	No lightweight system provides both LSM write performance and ACID semantics.


Section 3 — Design Goals for Oblivinx3x
Based on the ecosystem gaps identified in Section 2, the following design goals define the requirements for the Oblivinx3x database engine. These goals are non-negotiable and drive every architectural decision in the subsequent sections.

Goal ID	Goal	Priority	Inspired By
G-01	Embedded, single-file operation (.ovn format)	Critical	SQLite
G-02	Native document model (nested objects, arrays)	Critical	MongoDB
G-03	Zero-dependency in-process library	Critical	SQLite, LevelDB
G-04	ACID transactions with MVCC isolation	Critical	SQLite, WiredTiger
G-05	Hybrid B+/LSM storage to minimize write amplification	High	RocksDB + SQLite
G-06	Adaptive compound indexing	High	Novel
G-07	Self-tuning buffer pool	High	Novel
G-08	Sub-10MB library binary	High	SQLite
G-09	Simple developer API similar to MongoDB MQL	High	MongoDB
G-10	Concurrent reads with single-writer WAL	High	SQLite WAL mode
G-11	Custom .ovn file format with compression	Medium	Novel
G-12	Change streams for real-time event notification	Medium	MongoDB
G-13	Large binary object storage (GridFS equivalent)	Medium	MongoDB GridFS
G-14	Time-series collections with automatic bucketing	Medium	MongoDB Time-Series
G-15	Geospatial indexing (2dsphere / R-tree)	Medium	MongoDB
G-16	TTL indexes and capped collections	Medium	MongoDB
G-17	Retryable writes with session-level idempotency	Medium	MongoDB
G-18	Optional distributed extension (replication)	Low	CouchDB, Realm Sync

3.1 Target Deployment Environments
Oblivinx3x is designed to operate efficiently across the following deployment contexts, each with distinct resource and operational constraints:

Backend APIs (Node.js, Go, Python, Rust):
Loaded as a native library module. Used as a local embedded database for user-specific data, session stores, request caching, and feature flags. Must handle thousands of concurrent read operations per second with single-writer serialization.

Edge Computing (Cloudflare Workers, Fastly Compute@Edge):
Runs in WASM-compatible sandboxes with 128MB memory limits. The .ovn file is read from object storage (R2, S3) and opened in read-only mode for query resolution. Must support cold-start initialization in under 5ms.

Microservices:
Each microservice maintains its own .ovn file as a local cache or primary store for its bounded context. Supports sidecar deployment patterns where the .ovn file is a shared volume.

Serverless Functions (AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions):
Packaged within the function deployment bundle. The .ovn file is provisioned from a mounted EFS volume or object storage. Read-heavy workloads dominate; writes occur only on cold-start initialization.

Embedded Systems (ARM Cortex-M4+, RISC-V):
Cross-compiled with a minimal feature set (no replication, no full-text search). The .ovn file is stored on flash storage. Memory usage must not exceed 2MB at runtime.


Section 4 — Oblivinx3x Core Architecture
Oblivinx3x is organized into eight layered subsystems. Each layer has a single responsibility and communicates with adjacent layers through well-defined interfaces. The architecture is deliberately layered to enable selective compilation — embedded targets can strip distributed, full-text, and vector layers.

4.1 System Layer Diagram
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              Developer API Layer                    │
│   (JavaScript / C / Rust / Python FFI bindings)    │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│              Query Engine Layer                     │
│   (Parser → Planner → Optimizer → Executor)        │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│              Index Engine Layer                     │
│   (Adaptive Hybrid Index Tree — AHIT)              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│              Document Layer                         │
│   (OVN Encoding, Schema Validation, Type System)    │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│              MVCC Transaction Layer                 │
│   (Snapshot Isolation, Write Conflict Detection)    │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│              Storage Engine Layer                   │
│   (Hybrid B+/LSM Engine, WAL, Buffer Pool)         │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│              I/O Abstraction Layer                  │
│   (OS File API, mmap, Direct I/O, WASM FS shim)    │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│              Background Worker Layer                │
│   (Compaction, GC, Index Optimizer, WAL Cleanup,   │
│    Change Stream Emitter, TTL Reaper)              │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

4.2 The Adaptive Hybrid Index Tree (AHIT) — Architectural Innovation
The primary architectural innovation in Oblivinx3x is the Adaptive Hybrid Index Tree (AHIT). AHIT is a novel index structure that combines the sorted range-scan efficiency of a B+ tree with the write efficiency of an LSM-tree, and adds a query-pattern-aware node promotion mechanism that automatically elevates frequently accessed subtrees closer to the root.
Core Concept:
AHIT divides the index into two zones: the Hot Zone and the Cold Zone. The Hot Zone is a B+ tree in memory representing the most recently written and most frequently read index entries. The Cold Zone is a series of immutable, sorted SSTable files on disk. A background 'Promoter' thread monitors query patterns and moves cold index nodes into the hot zone when their access frequency exceeds a configurable threshold (the 'promotion threshold').
Why AHIT Improves Performance:
For write-heavy workloads, new index entries are written sequentially to the Hot Zone MemTable (O(1) amortized). For read-heavy workloads on popular fields, the Promoter ensures those entries reside in the in-memory B+ tree, achieving O(log N) lookup with no disk I/O. For cold data (infrequently accessed), SSTable files with Bloom filters ensure O(1) miss detection. This adaptive behavior eliminates the need for manual tuning of cache-vs-disk trade-offs.

4.3 Storage Engine Layer
The storage engine implements a Hybrid B+/LSM architecture. Writes are directed to a Write Buffer (MemTable implemented as a skip list for O(log N) insert), then flushed to L0 SSTables. Unlike pure LSM systems, Oblivinx3x maintains a persistent B+ tree ('Permanent Tree') for the primary document store, optimized for point lookups and range scans. The LSM layer serves as the intake pipeline — SSTables at L0 are progressively merged into the Permanent Tree during background compaction.
This hybrid design provides LSM-level write throughput while preserving B+ tree read efficiency for the stable, compacted dataset. The transition from LSM intake to B+ permanent storage is transparent to upper layers.

4.4 Document Layer
The document layer implements the OVN Binary Encoding Format (described in detail in Section 5). It handles document parsing, field extraction, type validation, and the dot-notation path resolver used by the query engine for nested field access.
The schema validator enforces optional collection-level JSON Schema rules without requiring them. The validator behavior is controlled by two properties set at collection creation time:
- validationLevel: Controls which documents are validated. 'strict' (default) validates all inserts and updates. 'moderate' validates inserts and updates to documents that already satisfy the current validator; existing non-conforming documents are not re-validated.
- validationAction: Controls what happens when a document fails validation. 'error' (default) rejects the write and returns an error to the client. 'warn' allows the write to proceed but logs a validation warning to the observability subsystem.
These two properties mirror MongoDB's validator behavior and enable incremental schema enforcement on existing collections without requiring a costly migration step.

4.5 MVCC Transaction Layer
Oblivinx3x implements Multi-Version Concurrency Control (MVCC) at the document level. Each document version is stamped with a transaction ID (TxID). Readers see a consistent snapshot defined by the lowest active TxID at the time the read begins. Writers create new document versions without overwriting existing versions. A garbage collector (GC) thread purges versions no longer visible to any active snapshot.

4.6 Query Engine Layer
The query engine implements a MongoDB Query Language (MQL)-compatible subset with Oblivinx-specific extensions. The pipeline is: Lexer → Parser → AST → Logical Plan → Physical Plan → Executor. The optimizer applies three classes of transformations: predicate pushdown (filters applied before projection), index selection (substitutes collection scans with index scans), and sort merging (eliminates redundant sorts on indexed fields).


Section 5 — .OVN Database File Format
The .ovn file format is the foundational storage primitive of Oblivinx3x. It is a single-file, page-oriented, self-describing binary format designed for durability, compactness, and efficient random access. All integers are stored in little-endian byte order. All string values in headers and metadata are UTF-8 encoded.

5.1 File Header (Page 0 — Always 4096 bytes)
Offset   Size   Field
───────────────────────────────────────────────
0x0000    4     Magic Number: 0x4F564E58 ('OVNX')
0x0004    2     Format Version Major (e.g., 0x0001)
0x0006    2     Format Version Minor (e.g., 0x0001)
0x0008    4     Page Size in bytes (default 4096)
0x000C    8     Total file size in bytes
0x0014    8     Root Page Number of Primary B+ Tree
0x001C    8     Root Page Number of Metadata B+ Tree
0x0024    8     WAL Segment Start Offset
0x002C    8     WAL Segment Size in bytes
0x0034    4     Number of collections
0x0038    4     Checksum (CRC32 of bytes 0x0000-0x0034)
0x003C    4     Flags (Bit 0: WAL active, Bit 1: Encrypted, Bit 2: Compressed,
                       Bit 3: Has Blob Segment, Bit 4: Has Change Stream Log)
0x0040    8     Creation timestamp (Unix epoch, milliseconds)
0x0048    8     Last checkpoint timestamp
0x0050    16    Database UUID (128-bit random)
0x0060    64    Application identifier (UTF-8, null-padded)
0x00A0    ...   Reserved for future use
0x0FF0    16    Shadow copy of magic + version + page size (corruption detection)

5.2 Segment Layout
The .ovn file is divided into segment types. Segment boundaries are page-aligned. The Segment Directory resides at a known offset (Page 1) and maps segment type codes to page ranges.

Segment Type	Code	Contents	Starting Page
Header Segment	0x01	File header, database metadata, collection registry	0
Data Segment	0x02	Document pages, overflow pages	2
Index Segment	0x03	B+ tree index pages, SSTable index blocks	Dynamic
WAL Segment	0x04	Write-ahead log records, transaction journal	Dynamic
Metadata Segment	0x05	Collection schemas, statistics, version history	Dynamic
Blob Segment	0x06	Binary large objects > 16MB, chunked at 255KB boundaries	Dynamic
Change Stream Log	0x07	Ordered change event records for active stream subscribers	Dynamic

Blob Segment (0x06) Detail:
The Blob Segment implements GridFS-equivalent storage for binary objects exceeding the default 16MB document size limit. Large binaries are split into 255KB chunks, each stored as an individual page sequence. A Blob Directory B+ tree (stored within the Blob Segment) maps blob_id to chunk page ranges. Blobs are referenced from documents via a special OBE type tag (0x0F — BlobRef), which stores the blob_id and total size. Blob writes follow the same WAL path as documents for durability. Compression (LZ4 or zstd) is applied per-chunk and configured independently from document compression.

Change Stream Log (0x07) Detail:
The Change Stream Log is an append-only circular buffer of change event records. Each record stores: [8-byte TxID] [4-byte collection ID] [1-byte operation type: insert/update/replace/delete/drop] [16-byte document ID] [varint pre-image length] [pre-image OBE bytes] [varint post-image length] [post-image OBE bytes]. The log has a configurable maximum size (default 64MB). When the log is full, the oldest records are overwritten. Subscribers that fall behind the log tail receive a 'CHANGE_STREAM_INVALIDATE' event and must re-establish their subscription from a fresh snapshot.

5.3 Page Layout
Each page is exactly [page_size] bytes (default 4096 bytes). Every page begins with a standard 32-byte page header followed by a type-specific payload.

Page Header (32 bytes):
  Offset  Size  Field
  0x00     4    Page Type (0x01=Leaf, 0x02=Interior, 0x03=Overflow, 0x04=WAL,
                           0x05=Free, 0x06=BlobChunk, 0x07=ChangeStreamRecord)
  0x04     8    Page Number (0-indexed)
  0x0C     8    Transaction ID that last modified this page
  0x14     2    Number of document slots (for leaf pages)
  0x16     2    Free space offset (bytes from start of payload area)
  0x18     4    Right sibling page number (for B+ tree leaf chain)
  0x1C     4    CRC32 checksum of page bytes 0x20 to end

Leaf Page Payload:
  [Slot Array — 4 bytes per slot, grows from payload start]
    Slot N: { doc_offset: 2 bytes, doc_length: 2 bytes }
  [Document Data — packed from payload end, growing backward]
    doc_N: OVN-encoded document bytes

Interior Page Payload:
  [Key-Pointer Pairs — (key_length, key_bytes, child_page_number)]
  [Rightmost child pointer — 8 bytes]

5.4 OVN Binary Encoding Format
Documents are encoded using the OVN Binary Encoding (OBE), a compact binary format inspired by BSON but with key structural improvements: field IDs replace field name repetition for schema-aware collections, and variable-length integers (varint) reduce storage for small values.

OBE Document Structure:
  [4 bytes]  Document total length (includes itself)
  [16 bytes] Document ID (128-bit UUID or user-provided _id)
  [8 bytes]  Transaction ID (version stamp)
  [1 byte]   Tombstone flag (0x00 = live, 0xFF = deleted)
  [varint]   Number of fields
  [Fields...]

OBE Field Structure:
  [varint]   Field name length (0 = use Field ID from schema)
  [bytes]    Field name (UTF-8) OR Field ID (2 bytes if length == 0)
  [1 byte]   Type tag
  [...]      Value bytes (type-dependent)

Type tags define the value encoding format:

Tag	Type	Encoding
0x01	Null	No value bytes
0x02	Boolean True	No value bytes
0x03	Boolean False	No value bytes
0x04	Int32	4 bytes little-endian
0x05	Int64	8 bytes little-endian
0x06	Float64	8 bytes IEEE 754
0x07	String	varint length + UTF-8 bytes
0x08	Binary	varint length + raw bytes
0x09	Document (nested)	Recursive OBE document
0x0A	Array	varint count + element values
0x0B	Timestamp	8 bytes Unix epoch milliseconds
0x0C	ObjectId	12 bytes (4-byte time + 5-byte machine + 3-byte counter)
0x0D	Decimal128	16 bytes IEEE 754 decimal128
0x0E	Varint	1-9 bytes LEB128 encoded integer
0x0F	BlobRef	16-byte blob_id + 8-byte total_size (references Blob Segment)
0x10	GeoPoint	16 bytes (8-byte latitude + 8-byte longitude, IEEE 754 float64)
0x11	GeoJSON	varint length + GeoJSON bytes (Point/LineString/Polygon/etc.)

5.5 Compression
Oblivinx3x supports two levels of compression, both optional and configured per-collection:
Page-level compression:
Entire pages (excluding the 32-byte header) are compressed using LZ4 before being written to disk. LZ4 is selected for its exceptional decompression speed (>4GB/s), ensuring that the decompression overhead does not become a bottleneck for read-heavy workloads. Compression is applied only to Data Segment and Index Segment pages; WAL pages are never compressed to preserve crash recovery speed.
Document-level compression:
Individual documents exceeding 512 bytes are optionally compressed using Zstandard (zstd) with a shared per-collection dictionary trained on sample documents. The shared dictionary dramatically improves compression ratio for structurally similar documents (e.g., all user records). The dictionary is stored in the Metadata Segment and loaded into memory on collection open.


Section 6 — Write Path Micro Process
The write path in Oblivinx3x is designed to minimize latency for the client while maintaining ACID guarantees. The path is non-blocking for the client thread beyond the WAL flush, with all heavy I/O work delegated to background threads.

6.1 Write Pipeline Overview
  Client Thread                                Background Thread
  ──────────────                               ──────────────────
  [1] Client Request (insert/update/delete)
       │
  [2] Query Parser → validate MQL syntax
       │
  [3] Document Validator → check JSON Schema (if set)
       │
  [4] MVCC Snapshot → assign TxID
       │
  [5] Serialize to OBE binary
       │
  [6] WAL Writer → fsync to .ovn WAL segment   ──────→ WAL Cleaner
       │
  [7] MemTable Insert (skip list, O(log N))
       │                                        ──────→ [8] MemTable Flush (→ L0 SSTable)
  [9] AHIT Index Update (Hot Zone)
       │                                        ──────→ [10] Compaction (L0→Permanent B+ Tree)
  [11] Return Acknowledgment to Client          ──────→ [12] Change Stream Emitter (async)
                                                ──────→ [13] TTL Reaper check (timer)

6.2 Step-by-Step Write Path Detail
Step 1 — Client Request
The client calls db.insert(), db.update(), or db.delete() via the JavaScript/FFI API. The call marshals the document into the OVN API request format and submits it to the Engine's write queue. The write queue is a lock-free MPSC (multi-producer, single-consumer) queue to prevent thundering herd problems when multiple goroutines or threads submit writes concurrently.
Step 2 — Query Parsing
The query parser tokenizes and parses the MQL filter and update operator expressions. For insert operations, parsing validates the document structure. For updates, the parser extracts the filter predicate and the update operators ($set, $inc, $push, $unset, etc.) into an AST. Parsing is O(N) in the document size and is bounded by a configurable maximum document size (default 16MB, minimum 4KB). Documents exceeding 16MB must use the BlobRef type (Section 5.2, Blob Segment) for large binary fields.
Step 3 — Document Validation
If the collection has an associated JSON Schema (set via db.setValidator()), the document is validated against the schema using a streaming JSON Schema validator. The behavior on validation failure is controlled by the collection's validationAction setting: 'error' rejects the write; 'warn' allows the write and logs the violation. The validationLevel setting controls whether existing documents that do not conform to the current schema are re-validated on update. Schema validation is optional and has zero overhead when not configured.
Step 4 — MVCC Snapshot and TxID Assignment
The MVCC controller assigns a monotonically increasing Transaction ID (TxID) to the write operation. The TxID is a 64-bit unsigned integer generated from a hardware clock (rdtsc on x86, cntvct_el0 on ARM) combined with a thread-local sequence counter to ensure uniqueness under high concurrency. The TxID is embedded in the OBE document header and in the WAL record. For retryable writes (Section 10.6), the WAL record also embeds the client session ID (lsid) and operation number (txnNumber) for idempotency detection.
Step 5 — OBE Serialization
The document (a JavaScript object, C struct, or language-specific representation) is serialized to the OVN Binary Encoding format described in Section 5.4. Serialization includes field-name-to-field-ID resolution for schema-aware collections (replacing repeated field name strings with 2-byte IDs, reducing storage by 40-60% for typical document schemas). The serialized document is written to a thread-local serialization buffer to avoid heap allocation on the critical write path.
Step 6 — Write-Ahead Log
The serialized OBE document and the WAL record header are appended to the WAL segment in the .ovn file. The WAL record format is: [4-byte record type] [8-byte TxID] [4-byte collection ID] [16-byte lsid (session ID, zeroed if not a retryable write)] [8-byte txnNumber] [varint document length] [document bytes] [4-byte CRC32]. The WAL writer calls fsync() (or fdatasync()) after each write to guarantee durability. For group commit optimization, the WAL writer batches multiple pending WAL records into a single fsync when multiple clients are writing concurrently, amortizing the fsync cost.
Step 7 — MemTable Insert
The OBE document is inserted into the active MemTable, which is a concurrent skip list. The skip list provides O(log N) insert and O(log N) lookup with low constant factors. The MemTable is partitioned by collection ID. When the total MemTable size exceeds the configured MemTable threshold (default 64MB), a new MemTable is created and the old one is queued for flush by the background MemTable Flusher thread.
Step 8 — MemTable Flush (Background)
The background MemTable Flusher serializes the MemTable contents into an L0 SSTable file within the Index Segment of the .ovn file. The SSTable is sorted by document ID and includes a Bloom filter for O(1) miss detection. The SSTable header records the minimum and maximum keys for range-based pruning. After the SSTable is written and fsync'd, the corresponding WAL records become eligible for reclamation.
Step 9 — AHIT Index Update
The indexing subsystem updates all affected AHIT index trees. For each indexed field in the document, the field value is extracted via the OBE decoder and inserted into the Hot Zone of the corresponding AHIT tree. The Hot Zone is an in-memory skip list — insert is O(log N) and non-blocking for readers (using lock-free skip list with compare-and-swap operations). For geospatial fields, the GeoPoint or GeoJSON value is encoded as an S2 cell token and inserted into the Geospatial Index R-tree (Section 8.7).
Step 10 — Compaction (Background)
The background Compaction Worker periodically merges L0 SSTables into the Permanent B+ Tree. The compaction process reads L0 SSTables in sorted order, merges them with the existing B+ tree pages, and writes updated pages back to the Data Segment. During compaction, the B+ tree remains fully readable — readers access the previous version via MVCC snapshots. Upon compaction completion, the old SSTable files are marked free and the MemTable WAL records are purged.
Step 11 — Client Acknowledgment
The client receives an acknowledgment as soon as the WAL write completes (Step 6). This is the durability guarantee point. The client does not wait for MemTable flush or compaction. The acknowledgment includes the assigned document _id and the TxID for use in subsequent dependent operations.
Step 12 — Change Stream Emitter (Background, Asynchronous)
After the client acknowledgment is sent, the Change Stream Emitter writes a change event record to the Change Stream Log (Segment 0x07). The event record includes the operation type, document ID, pre-image (for updates/deletes, captured from the MVCC version chain), and post-image (the newly written document version). Active stream subscribers are notified asynchronously via their registered callbacks. This step does not block the client write path.
Step 13 — TTL Reaper (Timer-Based)
The TTL Reaper background worker runs every 60 seconds and scans all TTL indexes for each collection. For each TTL index, it performs a range scan to find documents where the indexed time field is older than (current_time - expireAfterSeconds). Matching documents are deleted via the standard delete path (tombstone insert + WAL record). This ensures expired documents are removed with minimal I/O impact.

6.3 Failure Recovery
On process restart, Oblivinx3x scans the WAL segment forward from the last checkpoint. For each WAL record, it re-applies the write to the MemTable if the record's TxID is greater than the last checkpointed TxID. The checkpoint is recorded when the MemTable is fully flushed to SSTable and the SSTable is successfully merged into the Permanent B+ Tree. This ensures that no committed write is lost on restart and no uncommitted write survives a crash.


Section 7 — Read Path Micro Process
The read path is designed for maximum concurrency — multiple readers execute simultaneously without acquiring write locks. Reads interact with the MVCC snapshot system to ensure consistent views of the data.

7.1 Read Pipeline Overview
  [1] Client Query: db.find('users', { age: { $gt: 18 } })
       │
  [2] Query Parser → AST
       │
  [3] Query Optimizer → Index Selection / Plan Costing
       │
  [4] MVCC Snapshot Acquisition → determine visible TxID range
       │
  [5] AHIT Index Lookup (if indexed field)
       │        ↓ miss
  [6] Buffer Pool Check → page cache hit?
       │        ↓ miss
  [7] SSTable Bloom Filter Check → key definitely absent?
       │        ↓ possible hit
  [8] Disk Page Fetch → read B+ Tree leaf page
       │
  [9] OBE Document Decoding → reconstruct document
       │
  [10] Predicate Evaluation → apply remaining filters
       │
  [11] Projection → select requested fields
       │
  [12] Response Serialization → return to client

7.2 Query Optimizer — Plan Costing
The query optimizer assigns a cost to each candidate execution plan using the formula:
  Cost(plan) = (N_pages_read × PAGE_COST) + (N_docs_decoded × DECODE_COST) + (N_comparisons × CMP_COST)
Where PAGE_COST, DECODE_COST, and CMP_COST are tunable constants calibrated to actual hardware I/O and CPU performance. The optimizer maintains per-collection statistics: document count, average document size, field cardinality histograms, and page fill ratios. These statistics are updated by the background Statistics Collector worker (described in Section 11).
The optimizer considers the following plan types in order of preference: indexed point lookup (O(log N)), indexed range scan (O(log N + K) where K = result count), covered index scan (no document fetch needed), geospatial index scan (for $near/$geoWithin queries), partial collection scan (if a filter has high selectivity), and full collection scan (fallback).

7.3 MVCC Snapshot Semantics
When a read operation begins, it acquires an MVCC snapshot by recording the current minimum active TxID. The reader then only sees document versions whose TxID is less than or equal to the snapshot TxID and greater than the previous compaction TxID. This means readers always see a consistent snapshot of the database, even if a concurrent writer is modifying documents.
Algorithm complexity for MVCC version resolution: O(V) where V is the number of versions of a single document visible to active snapshots. In practice, V is typically 1-3 for normal workloads. The GC thread bounds V by purging old versions when no active snapshot references them.

7.4 Bloom Filter Optimization
Each SSTable file maintains a Bloom filter for its key set. The Bloom filter uses k=7 hash functions and a bit array sized for a false-positive rate of 1%. For a 1 million document SSTable, the Bloom filter requires approximately 1.2MB of memory. On an SSTable miss (key definitely not present), the Bloom filter check avoids the disk I/O entirely, contributing O(1) negative lookup.

7.5 Complexity Analysis

Operation	Best Case	Average Case	Worst Case	Notes
Point lookup (indexed)	O(log N)	O(log N)	O(log N)	B+ tree traversal
Point lookup (unindexed)	O(1)*	O(N)	O(N)	*if Bloom filter hits
Range scan (indexed)	O(log N + K)	O(log N + K)	O(log N + K)	K = result count
Range scan (unindexed)	O(N)	O(N)	O(N)	Full collection scan
Geospatial ($near)	O(log N + K)	O(log N + K)	O(N)	R-tree / S2 lookup
Insert	O(log N)	O(log N)	O(log N)	MemTable skip list
Update (indexed field)	O(log N)	O(log N)	O(log N)	Index update included
Delete	O(log N)	O(log N)	O(log N)	Tombstone insert
Aggregation (indexed)	O(K log N)	O(K log N)	O(N log N)	K = matching docs


Section 8 — Indexing System
The Oblivinx3x indexing system is built on the Adaptive Hybrid Index Tree (AHIT), which supports all standard index types while adding adaptive query-pattern optimization not available in traditional B+ tree or pure LSM systems.

8.1 Primary Document Index
Every collection maintains a primary index keyed on the document _id field. The primary index is a persistent B+ tree stored in the Index Segment. The B+ tree has a fanout factor of (page_size - header_size) / (key_size + pointer_size), which for the default 4096-byte page, 16-byte UUID keys, and 8-byte page pointers yields a fanout of approximately 240. A B+ tree with fanout 240 covering 1 billion documents requires at most ceil(log₂₄₀(10⁹)) = 4 levels, meaning any document lookup requires at most 4 page reads.

8.2 Secondary Indexes
Secondary indexes are AHIT structures keyed on one or more document field values. The key format for a secondary index entry is: [field_value_bytes | document_id_bytes]. This composite key allows the index to return the document ID for fetching the full document without a separate lookup step.
Index entries are stored in OBE-encoded form for consistency with the document store. The index value portion stores the document ID only (not the full document), minimizing index size.

TTL Index:
A TTL (Time-To-Live) index is a special secondary index on a field of type Timestamp or Int64 (Unix epoch). When created with the expireAfterSeconds option, the TTL Reaper background worker (Section 11.1) periodically scans the index for entries whose indexed time value is older than (current_time - expireAfterSeconds) and deletes the associated documents. TTL indexes are single-field only and cannot be compound. TTL indexes are compatible with all collection types except capped collections (which manage document expiry by size/count, not time).

8.3 Compound Indexes and the Skip-Column Optimization
Compound indexes in Oblivinx3x use the novel Skip-Column Optimization (SCO), which addresses the leftmost-prefix limitation of traditional compound indexes. In a standard B+ tree compound index on (A, B, C), a query filtering only on (B) or (C) cannot use the index and must fall back to a collection scan.
SCO Design:
Each compound index node stores not only the primary sort key but also a secondary hash bitmap that encodes the presence and hash of each indexed field. When a query filters on a non-leftmost field (e.g., field B), the AHIT index scan uses the bitmap to quickly identify candidate nodes before evaluating the full key comparison. This reduces the scan from O(N) to O(sqrt(N)) for uniformly distributed data.
The SCO is implemented by maintaining a 64-bit hash fingerprint for each field in the compound key within each B+ tree node. During a partial-key query, the engine applies a bitwise AND mask to the fingerprints to eliminate pages that cannot contain matching documents.

8.4 Full-Text Index
Full-text search is implemented using an inverted index stored in a dedicated Index Segment region. The inverted index maps stemmed, lowercased tokens to posting lists. Each posting list entry stores: [document_id, field_id, term_frequency, list_of_positions]. Positions enable phrase queries and proximity searches.
Tokenization uses the Unicode Text Segmentation algorithm (UAX #29) for language-agnostic tokenization. Optional language-specific stemmers (Porter stemmer for English, Snowball for European languages) can be registered via plugins. The inverted index is stored as a B+ tree keyed on token, with overflow pages for high-frequency terms.

8.4.1 Fuzzy Matching
Fuzzy matching allows queries to find documents even when the search term contains typos or minor spelling differences. Oblivinx3x implements fuzzy matching using a BK-tree (Burkhard-Keller tree) as a companion structure to the inverted index. The BK-tree is keyed on token strings and organizes them by Levenshtein edit distance. A fuzzy query with maxEdits: N retrieves all tokens within edit distance N from the query term, then resolves their posting lists.
Supported fuzzy options in the $text operator:
  { $text: { $search: 'wiget', $fuzzy: { maxEdits: 1, prefixLength: 3 } } }
- maxEdits: Maximum Levenshtein distance (1 or 2; default 0 = exact match).
- prefixLength: Number of leading characters that must match exactly before fuzzy expansion is applied (improves performance by constraining BK-tree traversal).
The BK-tree is built lazily during index compaction and stored as a serialized binary tree in a dedicated region of the Index Segment.

8.4.2 Autocomplete Index
The autocomplete index enables prefix-based token completion for search-as-you-type interfaces. It is implemented as a compressed radix trie (also known as a Patricia trie) stored in the Index Segment. Each trie node stores a compressed edge label and a pointer to the list of document IDs associated with all tokens in the subtree rooted at that node.
API:
  const suggestions = await db.autocomplete('products', {
    field: 'name',
    query: 'wid',
    maxResults: 5
  });
  // Returns: ['Widget A', 'Widget B', 'Widget Pro', ...]

The autocomplete trie is built incrementally during index updates. Trie construction is O(L) per token where L is the token length. Prefix lookup is O(L + K) where K is the number of results returned. The trie is stored separately from the inverted index and can be disabled per-collection to save memory.

8.5 Optional Vector Index (ANN Search)
For AI-augmented applications, Oblivinx3x supports an optional vector index based on the HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World) algorithm. The vector index is stored in a dedicated Index Segment as a serialized HNSW graph. HNSW provides approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search with O(log N) query complexity and configurable recall-precision trade-off.
The vector index supports float32 vectors with dimensions from 2 to 2048. Distance metrics supported: Euclidean (L2), Cosine, Inner Product (dot product). The vector index is built asynchronously by a background HNSW Builder thread and is available for queries after the build completes.

8.6 AHIT Hot Zone / Cold Zone Promotion
The AHIT Promoter thread monitors index access patterns using a frequency counter stored in each B+ tree node. The counter is incremented on each access using a lock-free atomic increment. When a node's counter exceeds the promotion threshold (default: 1000 accesses in the last 60 seconds), the node and its subtree are promoted to the Hot Zone — a memory-resident mirror of the cold disk-based subtree. Promoted nodes are served entirely from memory, eliminating disk I/O for frequently accessed index ranges.
Demotion occurs when the frequency counter drops below a configurable eviction threshold (default: 100 accesses in 60 seconds). The Hot Zone enforces a maximum size limit (configurable, default 25% of buffer pool). LRU eviction is applied when the Hot Zone is full.

8.7 Geospatial Index [NEW]
Oblivinx3x supports geospatial indexing for location-based queries on GeoJSON-encoded fields. The geospatial index is built on a combination of S2 Geometry cell indexing (for spherical / Earth-surface data) and an in-memory R-tree (for 2D planar data).

Index Types:
- 2dsphere: For Earth-surface coordinates (longitude/latitude). Documents must store coordinates as GeoJSON (Point, LineString, Polygon, MultiPoint, MultiLineString, MultiPolygon, GeometryCollection). Internally, GeoJSON geometries are decomposed into S2 cell tokens at multiple levels (configurable; default levels 1-20). S2 cell tokens are stored as compound index keys in an AHIT structure, enabling fast region containment checks.
- 2d: For flat 2D plane coordinates. Uses an R-tree for bounding-box and nearest-neighbor queries. Suitable for game maps, floor plans, and other non-spherical coordinate systems.

Supported Operators:
  { location: { $near: { $geometry: { type: 'Point', coordinates: [106.8456, -6.2088] }, $maxDistance: 5000 } } }
  { location: { $nearSphere: { $geometry: { type: 'Point', coordinates: [lng, lat] }, $maxDistance: 1000 } } }
  { location: { $geoWithin: { $geometry: { type: 'Polygon', coordinates: [[[...]]] } } } }
  { location: { $geoWithin: { $centerSphere: [[lng, lat], radiusInRadians] } } }
  { location: { $geoIntersects: { $geometry: { type: 'LineString', coordinates: [[...]] } } } }

Index Creation API:
  await db.createIndex('stores', { location: '2dsphere' });
  await db.createIndex('tiles', { position: '2d' }, { min: -1000, max: 1000 });

Performance:
$near queries on a 2dsphere index use S2 cell range scans. The query expands from the center point outward in S2 cell rings, fetching candidate documents and sorting by exact geodesic distance. Query complexity is O(log N + K) for K results. $geoWithin polygon queries use S2 cell covering — the polygon is approximated as a union of S2 cells, and the index is scanned for documents whose cell tokens fall within the cover. False positives from cell over-approximation are filtered by an exact containment test.


Section 9 — Memory Management
Oblivinx3x implements a multi-tier memory architecture that adapts to available system memory and observed workload patterns, reducing the need for manual memory tuning.

9.1 Buffer Pool
The Buffer Pool is the central page cache for Oblivinx3x. It maintains a pool of fixed-size page slots equal to [buffer_pool_size / page_size] entries. The Buffer Pool implements a segmented LRU eviction policy: each page enters the 'probationary' segment on first access. If accessed again, it is promoted to the 'protected' segment. Eviction targets the probationary segment first, protecting recently promoted hot pages from scan-induced eviction (solving the sequential scan cache pollution problem).
The Buffer Pool size defaults to min(256MB, 25% of available RAM) and adjusts automatically based on the Working Set Estimator, described below.

9.2 Working Set Estimator
The Working Set Estimator (WSE) is a novel memory management component unique to Oblivinx3x. The WSE tracks the set of pages accessed within a rolling time window (default 60 seconds) using a sparse bitmap. The cardinality of this bitmap (the number of distinct pages accessed) estimates the working set size. If the working set exceeds 80% of the Buffer Pool, the WSE signals the Pool Manager to increase the Buffer Pool allocation. If the working set drops below 30% for more than 120 seconds, the Pool Manager reduces the Buffer Pool allocation, returning memory to the OS.

9.3 MemTable Memory
Each collection's active MemTable consumes memory proportional to the number of unflushed document writes. The MemTable is a skip list with a configurable maximum memory limit (default 64MB per collection). When the limit is reached, the MemTable is frozen (made immutable) and a new empty MemTable is activated. Frozen MemTables are flushed to disk by the background Flusher thread. A maximum of 3 frozen MemTables can exist simultaneously before write throttling is applied to the client.

9.4 AHIT Hot Zone Memory
The AHIT Hot Zone is allocated from a dedicated memory region separate from the Buffer Pool. This prevents hot index data from competing with page data for the same pool. The Hot Zone uses a slab allocator — AHIT nodes are allocated from pre-sized slabs (64-byte, 128-byte, 256-byte, and 512-byte) to eliminate fragmentation from variable-size allocations.

9.5 Garbage Collection and Version Purging
MVCC version visibility management is handled by the GC Thread. The GC Thread maintains a list of active MVCC snapshots. Periodically (every 5 seconds by default), the GC Thread determines the minimum TxID of all active snapshots (the 'horizon TxID'). Document versions older than the horizon TxID that have been superseded by newer versions are marked as garbage. The GC Thread then scans the Data Segment for garbage-marked document versions and reclaims their page space, updating the free-page bitmap in the Metadata Segment.

9.6 Anti-Fragmentation Strategy
Memory fragmentation is prevented through three mechanisms: slab allocation for AHIT nodes (fixed-size slots eliminate external fragmentation), page-aligned buffer pool slots (all page allocations are fixed-size, preventing heap fragmentation), and periodic compaction of the Data Segment during low-activity windows (rewrites document pages to eliminate internal fragmentation caused by document updates and deletions).


Section 10 — Concurrency Control
Oblivinx3x implements Multi-Version Concurrency Control (MVCC) as its primary concurrency mechanism, augmented with optimistic locking for write-write conflict detection and lock-free data structures on the critical read path.

10.1 MVCC Implementation
Each document write creates a new document version with a unique TxID. The document's previous version is not overwritten — it remains in place until garbage collected. The version chain for a document is maintained as a linked list of OBE-encoded versions, sorted by TxID in descending order (newest first). The primary B+ tree points to the head of the version chain for each document.
When a reader accesses a document, it walks the version chain to find the first version with TxID ≤ snapshot_TxID and tombstone_flag == 0x00. This walk is O(V) where V is the version chain length, bounded by the GC horizon.

10.2 Snapshot Isolation
Oblivinx3x provides Snapshot Isolation (SI) as its default isolation level. Under SI, each transaction reads from a consistent snapshot taken at transaction start. No dirty reads are possible (uncommitted writes are invisible). No non-repeatable reads are possible (the snapshot is immutable). Phantom reads are prevented for collection scans via predicate locking on AHIT index ranges.
SI is weaker than Serializable Isolation — write skew anomalies are theoretically possible. For workloads requiring full serializability, Oblivinx3x provides a Serializable mode that uses Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI, the Cahill algorithm) to detect and abort transactions exhibiting dangerous read-write anti-dependencies.

10.3 Optimistic Concurrency Control
Write-write conflicts are detected optimistically: both writers proceed without acquiring locks. Before committing, each writer checks whether any field it read (read set) has been modified by a concurrent committed transaction with a higher TxID. If a conflict is detected, the transaction with the lower TxID is aborted and retried. The retry logic is built into the API layer with configurable maximum retry count (default 3) and exponential backoff.

10.4 Lock-Free Read Strategy
Reads on the critical path (Buffer Pool access, AHIT Hot Zone lookup, MemTable scan) use lock-free algorithms based on atomic compare-and-swap operations. The Buffer Pool's page table is implemented as a lock-free hash map (the Hazard Pointer technique prevents ABA problems). The AHIT Hot Zone skip list uses CAS-based atomic pointer updates. MemTable reads use epoch-based reclamation to safely access a skip list being concurrently modified.

10.5 Write Conflict Resolution
When a write-write conflict is detected during optimistic commit validation, Oblivinx3x applies the following resolution strategy: the transaction with the higher TxID (later writer) wins. The lower TxID transaction is aborted and returned a WRITE_CONFLICT error to the client. The client's retry logic re-executes the entire transaction from the beginning, acquiring a new snapshot and re-evaluating all read operations. This strategy is correct under Snapshot Isolation and avoids the thundering herd problem of pessimistic locking.

10.6 Retryable Writes [NEW]
Retryable writes provide transparent, driver-level retry for write operations that fail due to transient errors (network interruption, primary failover in distributed mode, or temporary write throttling). Retryable writes are implemented using logical session IDs and per-session operation counters to detect and deduplicate retried operations at the engine level.

Session Management:
Each client connection is associated with a logical session identified by a 128-bit session ID (lsid). Sessions are created implicitly on first use and expire after a configurable idle timeout (default 30 minutes). The session registry is stored in the Metadata Segment.

Idempotency Key:
Each retryable write operation includes an idempotency key composed of: [lsid (16 bytes)] + [txnNumber (8-byte monotonically increasing counter per session)]. This key is stored in the WAL record (Section 6.2, Step 6). On retry, the engine checks the WAL and the Idempotency Cache (an in-memory LRU map of recent lsid+txnNumber pairs) before executing the write. If the key is found, the original operation's result is returned without re-executing the write.

Supported Operations:
Retryable writes apply to: insertOne, insertMany, updateOne (with a unique filter), replaceOne, deleteOne. Operations that are inherently non-idempotent by nature (e.g., $inc, $push on arrays) are not retried automatically — the client must explicitly opt in by setting retryable: true and accepting possible duplicate side effects, or by wrapping the operation in a transaction.

Configuration:
  const db = await ovn.open('data.ovn', { retryableWrites: true });
  // All eligible write operations will be automatically retried on transient failure.


Section 11 — Background Systems
Oblivinx3x operates a set of background worker threads that handle maintenance tasks without blocking client operations. All workers operate at configurable priority levels and are throttled during high client load.

11.1 Background Worker Registry

Worker Name	Trigger	Priority	Function
MemTable Flusher	MemTable size > threshold	High	Flush frozen MemTable to L0 SSTable
Compaction Worker	L0 SSTable count > 4	Medium	Merge L0 SSTables into Permanent B+ Tree
WAL Cleaner	Post-MemTable flush	Low	Purge committed WAL records
AHIT Promoter	Access counter > threshold	Low	Promote hot AHIT subtrees to Hot Zone
AHIT Demoter	Hot Zone > 80% capacity	Low	Evict cold AHIT subtrees
GC Thread	Timer: every 5 seconds	Low	Purge MVCC version chains beyond horizon
Statistics Collector	Timer: every 60 seconds	Minimal	Update cardinality histograms
WSE Adjuster	Timer: every 30 seconds	Minimal	Resize Buffer Pool based on working set
Checkpoint Writer	Timer: every 60s OR WAL > 16MB	Medium	Write B+ tree root checkpoint to header
Defragmenter	Fragmentation ratio > 30%	Minimal	Compact Data Segment pages
Change Stream Emitter	Post-WAL write commit	Medium	Write change events to Stream Log; notify active subscribers
TTL Reaper	Timer: every 60 seconds	Low	Delete documents where TTL index field < (now - expireAfterSeconds)
HNSW Builder	New vector index / bulk insert	Low	Build or update HNSW graph asynchronously
Blob Compactor	Blob Segment fragmentation > 30%	Minimal	Rewrite Blob Segment to reclaim space from deleted blobs

Change Stream Emitter Detail:
The Change Stream Emitter runs asynchronously after each committed write (post-WAL, post-acknowledgment). It constructs a change event document with the following fields:
  {
    _id:           { _data: '<resume_token>' },  // opaque token for stream resumption
    operationType: 'insert' | 'update' | 'replace' | 'delete' | 'drop' | 'rename',
    ns:            { db: '<db_name>', coll: '<collection_name>' },
    documentKey:   { _id: '<document_id>' },
    fullDocument:  { ... },           // present for insert, replace, and update (if fullDocument: 'updateLookup')
    updateDescription: {              // present for update operations only
      updatedFields:   { ... },
      removedFields:   [ ... ],
      truncatedArrays: [ ... ]
    },
    clusterTime:   <TxID as timestamp>
  }
Subscribers registered via db.watch() receive these events in TxID order. Resume tokens allow a subscriber to restart a stream from the last successfully processed event after a disconnect.

TTL Reaper Detail:
The TTL Reaper iterates over all collections with at least one TTL index. For each TTL index, it performs an AHIT range scan for entries with a time value ≤ (current_unix_ms - expireAfterSeconds * 1000). Matching document IDs are collected in a batch (max 1000 per reaper cycle to limit I/O impact), then deleted via the standard tombstone insert path. Each deletion batch is committed as a single WAL write to minimize fsync overhead.

11.2 Compaction Strategy
The Compaction Worker implements a tiered compaction strategy specific to the Hybrid B+/LSM architecture. When L0 SSTable count reaches 4, all L0 SSTables are merged into a single sorted run. This sorted run is then incrementally merged into the Permanent B+ Tree using a merge-scan algorithm that reads sorted SSTable pages and the corresponding B+ tree leaf pages in parallel, producing a merged B+ tree structure.
The compaction process maintains a shadow copy of affected B+ tree subtrees during compaction. Readers continue to use the original subtrees via their MVCC snapshots. Once the shadow copy is complete and fsync'd, the B+ tree root pointers are atomically updated (a single 8-byte pointer write, which is atomic on 64-bit platforms).

11.3 Scheduling and Throttling
All background workers use a priority-based cooperative scheduler. Each worker is assigned an I/O budget: a maximum number of page reads/writes per scheduler tick (100ms). When the client write/read rate exceeds 90% of the system's I/O capacity, background workers reduce their I/O budget to 10% of their normal allocation, ensuring client operations are not starved by maintenance work.
The WAL Cleaner uses a two-phase approach: it first identifies committed WAL records older than the current GC horizon and marks them as reclaimable. In the second phase, it rewrites the WAL segment without the reclaimable records. WAL cleaning is performed during idle periods to avoid impacting write throughput.


Section 12 — Optional Distributed Extension
While Oblivinx3x is fundamentally an embedded database, it is designed with a clean internal API that allows an optional Distributed Extension (OVN-Dist) to be layered on top without modifying the core engine. OVN-Dist provides replication, cluster coordination, and distributed query execution.

12.1 Replication Model
OVN-Dist implements a single-leader replication model inspired by the Raft consensus algorithm. One node in a cluster is designated the Leader. All writes go to the Leader. The Leader applies the write to its local .ovn file and appends the WAL record to a Replication Log. Follower nodes receive WAL records via a streaming replication protocol and apply them to their local .ovn files.
The Replication Log is a separate append-only binary file (.ovn-rlog) that records all committed write operations in TxID order. Followers maintain a replication offset indicating their position in the Replication Log. On network partition, the Leader continues accepting writes (with reduced quorum if configured). On partition heal, Followers replay WAL records from their last offset.

12.2 Leader Election
Leader election uses the Raft leader election protocol. Each node maintains a term counter and a vote log. When a Follower does not receive a heartbeat from the Leader within the election timeout (150-300ms random), it transitions to Candidate state and requests votes from other nodes. A Candidate becomes Leader upon receiving votes from a majority of nodes. The election safety guarantee ensures at most one Leader per term.

12.3 Distributed Query Execution
Distributed queries in OVN-Dist use a scatter-gather model. The query coordinator (the Leader or a designated Coordinator node) parses the query and identifies which collection partitions are involved. For sharded collections (partitioned by hash or range of a shard key), the coordinator sends sub-queries to the relevant nodes. Each node executes its sub-query locally using its embedded Oblivinx3x engine and returns results to the coordinator. The coordinator merges, sorts, and projects the results before returning them to the client.

12.4 Sharding Strategy
OVN-Dist supports two sharding strategies: Hash Sharding (default) and Range Sharding. Hash Sharding distributes documents by computing a 64-bit hash of the shard key field value and assigning the document to the shard whose hash range covers the result. Range Sharding assigns documents to shards based on lexicographic ranges of the shard key, enabling efficient range queries across shards.


Section 13 — Library API Design
The Oblivinx3x API is designed to be familiar to MongoDB users while being idiomatic for the host language. The primary binding is JavaScript (Node.js native addon), with C, Go, Rust, and Python FFI bindings planned for Phase 7. All async operations return Promises in JavaScript.

13.1 Database Lifecycle
const ovn = require('oblivinix3x');

// Open or create a database
const db = await ovn.open('data.ovn', {
  pageSize: 4096,          // Page size in bytes (512 to 65536)
  bufferPool: '128MB',     // Buffer pool size
  walMode: true,           // Enable WAL for concurrent reads
  compression: 'lz4',     // Page compression: 'none' | 'lz4' | 'zstd'
  readOnly: false,         // Open in read-only mode
  retryableWrites: true    // Enable retryable writes (Section 10.6)
});

// Close the database gracefully
await db.close();

// Checkpoint — flush MemTable and WAL to Permanent B+ Tree
await db.checkpoint();

13.2 Collection Management
// Create a standard collection with optional validator
await db.createCollection('users', {
  validator: {
    $jsonSchema: {
      bsonType: 'object',
      required: ['name', 'email'],
      properties: {
        name: { bsonType: 'string' },
        age: { bsonType: 'int', minimum: 0 },
        email: { bsonType: 'string' }
      }
    }
  },
  validationLevel: 'strict',   // 'strict' (default) | 'moderate'
  validationAction: 'error'    // 'error' (default) | 'warn'
});

// Create a capped collection (fixed-size ring buffer)
// When the collection is full, the oldest documents are overwritten.
await db.createCollection('logs', {
  capped: true,
  size: 104857600,  // Maximum collection size in bytes (100MB)
  max: 50000        // Maximum number of documents (optional, combined with size)
});
// Note: Capped collections do not support TTL indexes or deletion of individual documents.
// They are ideal for log buffers, audit trails, and high-throughput event sinks.

// Create a time-series collection
// Documents are automatically grouped into time-based buckets for efficient range queries.
await db.createCollection('sensor_readings', {
  timeseries: {
    timeField: 'timestamp',   // Required: field name containing the measurement time (must be Timestamp or Int64)
    metaField: 'sensorId',    // Optional: field used to group measurements (becomes the bucket partition key)
    granularity: 'seconds'    // 'seconds' | 'minutes' | 'hours' — controls bucket window size
  },
  expireAfterSeconds: 2592000  // Optional TTL: delete buckets older than 30 days
});
// Time-series collections internally use a Bucket B+ Tree indexed by (metaField, timeField).
// Each bucket document contains compressed arrays of measurement values for a time window.
// $match on timeField translates directly to bucket range scans — no full collection scan needed.

// List collections
const collections = await db.listCollections();

// Drop a collection
await db.dropCollection('users');

// Modify validator on existing collection
await db.command({
  collMod: 'users',
  validator: { $jsonSchema: { ... } },
  validationLevel: 'moderate',  // Don't re-validate existing non-conforming docs
  validationAction: 'warn'
});

13.3 Document CRUD Operations
// Insert a single document
const result = await db.insert('users', {
  name: 'Alice Kim',
  age: 28,
  email: 'alice@example.com',
  address: { city: 'Jakarta', country: 'ID' },
  tags: ['admin', 'developer']
});
console.log(result.insertedId); // '5f4d...uuid...'

// Insert many documents
const bulkResult = await db.insertMany('products', [
  { name: 'Widget A', price: 9.99, stock: 100 },
  { name: 'Widget B', price: 14.99, stock: 50 },
]);

// Find documents
const users = await db.find('users', { age: { $gt: 18 } });

// Find with projection and sort
const names = await db.find('users',
  { 'address.city': 'Jakarta' },
  {
    projection: { name: 1, age: 1 },
    sort: { age: -1 },
    limit: 10,
    skip: 0
  }
);

// Find one document
const user = await db.findOne('users', { email: 'alice@example.com' });

// Update with operators
await db.update('users',
  { name: 'Alice Kim' },
  { $set: { age: 29 }, $push: { tags: 'senior' } }
);

// Update many
await db.updateMany('products',
  { stock: { $lt: 10 } },
  { $set: { status: 'low_stock' } }
);

// Delete
await db.delete('users', { name: 'Alice Kim' });
await db.deleteMany('products', { status: 'discontinued' });

// Store a large binary file (> 16MB) using Blob Segment
const blobId = await db.putBlob('reports', {
  filename: 'annual_report_2025.pdf',
  contentType: 'application/pdf',
  data: fs.readFileSync('report.pdf')  // Buffer or ReadableStream
});
const blobMeta = await db.getBlob('reports', blobId);
const stream = await db.getBlobStream('reports', blobId);

13.4 Indexing API
// Create secondary index
await db.createIndex('users', { age: 1 });

// Create compound index
await db.createIndex('users', { 'address.city': 1, age: -1 });

// Create full-text index with fuzzy and autocomplete support
await db.createIndex('articles', { content: 'text', title: 'text' }, {
  fuzzy: { maxEdits: 1, prefixLength: 3 },  // Enable BK-tree fuzzy matching
  autocomplete: true                          // Enable radix trie autocomplete
});

// Create TTL index — documents expire after 3600 seconds from the createdAt field
await db.createIndex('sessions', { createdAt: 1 }, { expireAfterSeconds: 3600 });

// Create geospatial index
await db.createIndex('stores', { location: '2dsphere' });
await db.createIndex('gameTiles', { position: '2d' }, { min: -500, max: 500 });

// Create vector index
await db.createVectorIndex('embeddings', {
  field: 'vector',
  dimensions: 1536,
  metric: 'cosine'
});

// Geospatial query examples
const nearbyStores = await db.find('stores', {
  location: {
    $near: {
      $geometry: { type: 'Point', coordinates: [106.8456, -6.2088] },
      $maxDistance: 5000   // meters
    }
  }
});

const storesInArea = await db.find('stores', {
  location: {
    $geoWithin: {
      $geometry: {
        type: 'Polygon',
        coordinates: [[[106.8, -6.3], [106.9, -6.3], [106.9, -6.1], [106.8, -6.1], [106.8, -6.3]]]
      }
    }
  }
});

// Fuzzy text search
const results = await db.find('articles', {
  $text: { $search: 'datbase arcitecture', $fuzzy: { maxEdits: 1 } }
});

// Autocomplete
const suggestions = await db.autocomplete('products', {
  field: 'name',
  query: 'wid',
  maxResults: 5
});

// Vector similarity search
const similar = await db.vectorSearch('embeddings', {
  vector: queryEmbedding,
  topK: 10,
  filter: { category: 'article' }
});

// List indexes
const indexes = await db.listIndexes('users');

// Drop index
await db.dropIndex('users', 'age_1');

13.5 Transactions
// ACID transaction
const txn = await db.beginTransaction();
try {
  await txn.insert('accounts', { userId: 'u1', balance: 1000 });
  await txn.update('accounts',
    { userId: 'u1' },
    { $inc: { balance: -200 } }
  );
  await txn.update('accounts',
    { userId: 'u2' },
    { $inc: { balance: 200 } }
  );
  await txn.commit();
} catch (err) {
  await txn.rollback();
  throw err;
}

13.6 Aggregation Pipeline
// MongoDB-compatible aggregation pipeline
const result = await db.aggregate('orders', [
  { $match: { status: 'completed', year: 2025 } },
  { $group: {
    _id: '$customerId',
    totalAmount: { $sum: '$amount' },
    orderCount: { $sum: 1 }
  }},
  { $sort: { totalAmount: -1 } },
  { $limit: 20 }
]);

// $facet — run multiple sub-pipelines in a single pass over the collection
// Returns a single document with one field per sub-pipeline
const facetResult = await db.aggregate('products', [
  { $match: { status: 'active' } },
  { $facet: {
    byCategory: [
      { $group: { _id: '$category', count: { $sum: 1 } } },
      { $sort: { count: -1 } }
    ],
    priceDistribution: [
      { $bucket: {
        groupBy: '$price',
        boundaries: [0, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500],
        default: 'Other',
        output: { count: { $sum: 1 }, avgPrice: { $avg: '$price' } }
      }}
    ],
    topBrands: [
      { $group: { _id: '$brand', revenue: { $sum: '$price' } } },
      { $sort: { revenue: -1 } },
      { $limit: 5 }
    ]
  }}
]);

// $bucket / $bucketAuto — group documents into user-defined or auto-computed buckets
const priceBuckets = await db.aggregate('products', [
  { $bucketAuto: {
    groupBy: '$price',
    buckets: 5,
    output: { count: { $sum: 1 }, avgPrice: { $avg: '$price' } }
  }}
]);

// $setWindowFields — window functions over ordered partitions (equivalent to SQL OVER PARTITION BY)
const runningTotals = await db.aggregate('sales', [
  { $setWindowFields: {
    partitionBy: '$region',
    sortBy: { date: 1 },
    output: {
      runningTotal: {
        $sum: '$amount',
        window: { documents: ['unbounded', 'current'] }
      },
      movingAvg: {
        $avg: '$amount',
        window: { documents: [-2, 0] }   // sliding window of 3 documents
      },
      rank: { $rank: {} }
    }
  }}
]);

// $merge — write aggregation results into a target collection
// Supports: whenMatched (merge | replace | keepExisting | fail), whenNotMatched (insert | discard | fail)
await db.aggregate('orders', [
  { $match: { year: 2025 } },
  { $group: { _id: '$customerId', totalSpend: { $sum: '$amount' } } },
  { $merge: {
    into: 'customerSummary',
    on: '_id',
    whenMatched: 'merge',
    whenNotMatched: 'insert'
  }}
]);

// $replaceRoot / $replaceWith — promote a nested document to the top level
const normalized = await db.aggregate('users', [
  { $replaceRoot: { newRoot: '$address' } }
]);

// $unwind with preserveNullAndEmptyArrays
const unwound = await db.aggregate('orders', [
  { $unwind: { path: '$items', preserveNullAndEmptyArrays: true } }
]);

13.7 Change Streams [NEW]
Change streams provide real-time notification of document changes in a collection or database. They are implemented on top of the Change Stream Log (Segment 0x07, Section 5.2) and deliver ordered, resumable event sequences to subscribers.

// Watch a collection for all change events
const stream = db.watch('users');
stream.on('change', (event) => {
  console.log(event.operationType);   // 'insert' | 'update' | 'replace' | 'delete'
  console.log(event.documentKey);     // { _id: '...' }
  console.log(event.fullDocument);    // the new document (for insert/replace)
  console.log(event.updateDescription); // { updatedFields: {...}, removedFields: [...] }
});
stream.on('error', (err) => { /* handle stream invalidation */ });

// Watch with a pipeline filter (only receive events matching the filter)
const filteredStream = db.watch('orders', [
  { $match: { 'fullDocument.status': 'completed', operationType: 'update' } }
], {
  fullDocument: 'updateLookup'  // Fetch the full post-update document
});

// Resume a stream after a disconnect using a resume token
const resumeToken = stream.resumeToken; // save this on disconnect
const resumedStream = db.watch('users', [], { resumeAfter: resumeToken });

// Watch the entire database (all collections)
const dbStream = db.watchAll([
  { $match: { 'ns.coll': { $in: ['users', 'orders'] } } }
]);

// Close a stream
await stream.close();

// Change event document structure:
// {
//   _id:              { _data: '<opaque resume token>' },
//   operationType:    'insert' | 'update' | 'replace' | 'delete' | 'drop' | 'rename',
//   ns:               { db: 'mydb', coll: 'users' },
//   documentKey:      { _id: '...' },
//   fullDocument:     { ... },          // null for delete; populated for insert, replace, update (if updateLookup)
//   updateDescription: {                // only for operationType: 'update'
//     updatedFields:   { 'age': 29, 'tags.2': 'senior' },
//     removedFields:   ['tempField'],
//     truncatedArrays: []
//   },
//   clusterTime:      <TxID>
// }


Section 14 — Performance Expectations
The following performance estimates are based on theoretical analysis of the architecture and benchmarking of comparable systems (RocksDB, SQLite, LMDB). Actual performance will vary based on hardware, workload characteristics, document size, and index configuration.

14.1 Target Hardware Baseline
All estimates are based on: 4-core x86-64 CPU at 3.0GHz, 8GB RAM, NVMe SSD with 500K IOPS and 3GB/s sequential throughput, 4KB page size, 256MB Buffer Pool, average document size 512 bytes.

14.2 Throughput Estimates

Metric	Oblivinx3x (Est.)	MongoDB 7.0	SQLite WAL	RocksDB
Sequential Write (docs/sec)	250,000 – 400,000	80,000 – 120,000	50,000 – 80,000	500,000 – 800,000
Random Write (docs/sec)	150,000 – 250,000	60,000 – 100,000	10,000 – 20,000	200,000 – 400,000
Point Read — indexed (docs/sec)	400,000 – 600,000	200,000 – 350,000	300,000 – 500,000	300,000 – 500,000
Range Scan (docs/sec)	200,000 – 350,000	150,000 – 250,000	200,000 – 350,000	250,000 – 400,000
Concurrent Reads (8 threads)	1,200,000 – 2,000,000	600,000 – 1,000,000	400,000 – 700,000	1,000,000 – 1,800,000
Geospatial $near (queries/sec)	80,000 – 150,000	50,000 – 100,000	N/A	N/A
Change Stream (events/sec)	200,000 – 400,000	100,000 – 200,000	N/A	N/A
Write Latency p50 (μs)	50 – 150	200 – 500	100 – 300	30 – 80
Write Latency p99 (μs)	500 – 2,000	2,000 – 10,000	1,000 – 5,000	200 – 1,000
Read Latency p50 (μs)	10 – 50	50 – 200	20 – 100	10 – 50

14.3 Storage Efficiency

Metric	Oblivinx3x (.ovn)	MongoDB (WiredTiger)	SQLite (.db)	RocksDB (.sst)
Storage overhead per document	~15%	~35-50%	~20-30%	~10-15%
Index size / data size ratio	~25%	~30-40%	~15-25%	~20-30%
Write amplification factor	2x – 4x	5x – 10x	3x – 6x	5x – 30x
Compression ratio (lz4)	2.5x – 4x	2x – 3x	N/A native	2x – 4x
Blob storage overhead	~3%	~5% (GridFS)	N/A	N/A
Geospatial index overhead	~8% of indexed data	~10%	N/A	N/A
Change Stream Log (default)	64MB (circular, fixed)	Variable	N/A	N/A

14.4 Memory Usage

Metric	Oblivinx3x	MongoDB	SQLite	RocksDB
Minimum RSS (idle)	~12MB	~300MB	~2MB	~5MB
Buffer Pool default	25% RAM or 256MB	50% RAM	Cache managed by OS	User-configured
MemTable default	64MB per collection	N/A	N/A	64MB (default)
Index Hot Zone default	64MB	Included in WiredTiger cache	OS page cache	Block cache
Change Stream subscriber (each)	~256KB ring buffer per subscriber	Variable	N/A	N/A
Geospatial index (R-tree in-memory cache)	~32MB default (configurable)	Included in WiredTiger cache	N/A	N/A


Section 15 — Production Readiness

15.1 Crash Recovery
Oblivinx3x guarantees recovery to the last committed transaction after any crash scenario, including process kill (SIGKILL), power failure, and OS crash. The recovery procedure is:
1. On open, read the database header from Page 0. Verify the magic number and CRC.
2. If the WAL Active flag is set in the header, a previous session did not cleanly checkpoint.
3. Scan the WAL segment forward from the last checkpoint TxID.
4. For each WAL record with a COMMIT marker, re-apply the write to the MemTable.
5. For each WAL record without a COMMIT marker (partial transaction), discard the record.
6. Flush the recovered MemTable to an L0 SSTable and trigger compaction.
7. Write a new checkpoint to the header. Clear the WAL Active flag.
Recovery time is proportional to the size of uncommitted WAL records since the last checkpoint. With the default 60-second checkpoint interval and typical write rates, recovery completes in under 2 seconds for most workloads.

15.2 Backup Systems
Oblivinx3x supports three backup strategies:
Hot Backup (Online Backup):
The db.backup(destinationPath) API creates a consistent backup without stopping writes. The backup process triggers a checkpoint, then copies the .ovn file to the destination. The copy uses a streaming copy that reads pages in order while tracking any pages modified by concurrent writes. Modified pages are re-read and appended to the destination. The result is a point-in-time consistent copy.
WAL-Based Incremental Backup:
The Replication Log (.ovn-rlog) from the Distributed Extension can be used for incremental backup. A backup agent connects as a read-only replica and streams WAL records to a remote backup store. This enables continuous backup with Recovery Point Objective (RPO) of seconds.
Snapshot Export:
The db.export(format, path) API exports a collection to JSON Lines, CSV, or BSON format for integration with external systems. Export is performed as a consistent read using an MVCC snapshot.

15.3 Durability Guarantees
Oblivinx3x provides the following durability guarantees by default: (1) D1 — WAL writes are fsync'd before acknowledging to the client (full durability). Optional weaker mode D0 (no fsync, in-memory only) and D2 (group fsync, latency/durability trade-off) are configurable per write operation.

15.4 Observability
// Metrics API
const metrics = await db.getMetrics();
console.log({
  // I/O metrics
  pagesRead: metrics.io.pagesRead,
  pagesWritten: metrics.io.pagesWritten,
  walBytesWritten: metrics.io.walBytesWritten,
  blobBytesStored: metrics.io.blobBytesStored,

  // Cache metrics
  bufferPoolHitRate: metrics.cache.hitRate,
  bufferPoolSize: metrics.cache.sizeBytes,
  ahitHotZoneSize: metrics.ahit.hotZoneSizeBytes,

  // Transaction metrics
  transactionsCommitted: metrics.txn.committed,
  transactionsAborted: metrics.txn.aborted,
  writeConflicts: metrics.txn.writeConflicts,
  retryableWriteRetries: metrics.txn.retryableWriteRetries,

  // Query metrics
  indexScans: metrics.query.indexScans,
  collectionScans: metrics.query.collectionScans,
  avgQueryLatencyUs: metrics.query.avgLatencyUs,
  p99QueryLatencyUs: metrics.query.p99LatencyUs,
  geospatialQueries: metrics.query.geospatialQueries,

  // Change stream metrics
  changeStreamSubscribers: metrics.changeStream.activeSubscribers,
  changeStreamEventsEmitted: metrics.changeStream.eventsEmitted,
  changeStreamLogUtilization: metrics.changeStream.logUtilizationPct,

  // TTL metrics
  ttlDocumentsDeleted: metrics.ttl.documentsDeleted,
  ttlLastRunMs: metrics.ttl.lastRunDurationMs,
});

A built-in HTTP metrics endpoint can be enabled to expose Prometheus-compatible metrics at http://localhost:9090/metrics, suitable for integration with Grafana dashboards.


Section 16 — Implementation Roadmap
The Oblivinx3x implementation is divided into eight phases. Each phase builds on the previous and delivers a testable milestone. The recommended implementation language is Rust for the core engine (memory safety, zero-cost abstractions, excellent FFI) with JavaScript bindings via Neon (Rust-based Node.js native addon framework).

Phase 1 — Storage Engine Prototype (Weeks 1–8)
Deliverable: A functional .ovn file that can read and write raw pages. No document model, no indexing.
1. Implement the .ovn file format specification: header (Page 0), Segment Directory (Page 1), page types including Blob Segment (0x06) and Change Stream Log (0x07) stubs.
2. Implement the Buffer Pool with segmented-LRU eviction. Support configurable pool size.
3. Implement the WAL writer: append WAL records including lsid/txnNumber fields, fsync, checkpointing.
4. Implement WAL recovery: replay on open after crash.
5. Implement the Permanent B+ Tree for key-value storage (raw bytes, no document model yet).
6. Implement the MemTable (concurrent skip list in Rust using crossbeam).
7. Implement MemTable flush to L0 SSTable with Bloom filter.
8. Write unit tests for page corruption detection, WAL recovery, and B+ tree operations.
9. Benchmark: raw page write throughput, B+ tree insert/lookup performance.

Phase 2 — Document Encoding (Weeks 9–14)
Deliverable: Documents can be stored, retrieved, and decoded from .ovn files.
10. Implement the OVN Binary Encoding (OBE) serializer and deserializer including new type tags: BlobRef (0x0F), GeoPoint (0x10), GeoJSON (0x11).
11. Implement document _id generation (UUID v4 and user-provided _id support).
12. Implement Field ID resolution for schema-aware collections (field name → 2-byte ID mapping).
13. Implement nested document and array encoding/decoding.
14. Implement page-level LZ4 compression and decompression.
15. Implement document-level zstd compression with shared dictionary training.
16. Implement the Blob Segment chunked storage: put/get/stream/delete blob operations.
17. Write fuzz tests for OBE encoder/decoder using libFuzzer.
18. Benchmark: serialization throughput, compression ratio on realistic document workloads.

Phase 3 — Indexing Engine (Weeks 15–24)
Deliverable: Secondary indexes, compound indexes, full-text with fuzzy/autocomplete, geospatial, and the AHIT Hot Zone are operational.
19. Implement the AHIT index structure: Hot Zone (in-memory skip list) + Cold Zone (SSTable index blocks).
20. Implement the AHIT Promoter: access frequency counters, promotion threshold, Hot Zone eviction.
21. Implement secondary index creation, update, and deletion including TTL index variant.
22. Implement compound index with Skip-Column Optimization (SCO).
23. Implement the Bloom filter for SSTable-level miss detection.
24. Implement full-text inverted index: tokenizer, stemmer, posting list storage.
25. Implement fuzzy matching BK-tree: construction, serialization, edit-distance traversal.
26. Implement autocomplete radix trie: construction, prefix lookup, trie serialization to Index Segment.
27. Implement geospatial index: S2 cell tokenization for 2dsphere, R-tree for 2d planar.
28. Implement geospatial query operators: $near, $nearSphere, $geoWithin, $geoIntersects.
29. Implement optional HNSW vector index (can use hnswlib as a starting point).
30. Write tests for index consistency: verify index matches collection scan results after random operations.

Phase 4 — Query Engine (Weeks 25–33)
Deliverable: MQL-compatible find, findOne, aggregate, and update operators work correctly including all new MongoDB-parity operators.
31. Implement the MQL lexer and parser: produce an AST from query filter expressions.
32. Implement logical plan: convert AST to a tree of logical operators (Filter, Scan, IndexScan, GeoScan, Projection, Sort, Limit, Group, Window, Facet).
33. Implement the cost-based optimizer: index selection including geospatial index plans.
34. Implement physical plan executors for each logical operator.
35. Implement update operators: $set, $unset, $inc, $push, $pull, $addToSet, $rename.
36. Implement aggregation pipeline stages: $match, $group, $project, $sort, $limit, $skip, $lookup, $unwind (with preserveNullAndEmptyArrays), $facet, $bucket, $bucketAuto, $setWindowFields, $merge, $replaceRoot, $replaceWith, $count, $out.
37. Implement dot-notation path resolver for nested field access.
38. Implement capped collection write semantics: size-bounded ring buffer eviction.
39. Implement time-series collection bucketing: automatic bucket creation, bucket B+ tree, bucket range scan.
40. Write correctness tests comparing Oblivinx3x query results against MongoDB on identical datasets.

Phase 5 — Concurrency Control (Weeks 34–42)
Deliverable: ACID transactions with MVCC, snapshot isolation, retryable writes, and change streams.
41. Implement TxID generation: hardware clock + thread-local sequence counter.
42. Implement MVCC document versioning: version chain linked list, tombstone support.
43. Implement MVCC snapshot acquisition and release.
44. Implement GC Thread: horizon TxID computation, version chain pruning.
45. Implement Snapshot Isolation: validate reads against snapshot TxID.
46. Implement optimistic write conflict detection: read set tracking, commit-time validation.
47. Implement transaction rollback: write set reversal, tombstone insertion.
48. Implement Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI) as optional strict mode.
49. Implement retryable writes: session ID management, idempotency key embedding in WAL, Idempotency Cache (LRU map).
50. Implement Change Stream Emitter: post-WAL event record construction, Change Stream Log circular buffer, subscriber notification callbacks, resume token generation and validation.
51. Write concurrency tests using parallel writers with intentional conflicts and verify ACID properties.
52. Write change stream tests: verify event ordering, resume token correctness, and subscriber isolation.

Phase 6 — Performance Optimization (Weeks 43–51)
Deliverable: Performance meets targets defined in Section 14 on the baseline hardware.
53. Implement group commit for WAL: batch multiple pending WAL records per fsync.
54. Implement the Working Set Estimator (WSE) and dynamic Buffer Pool resizing.
55. Profile and optimize the OBE serializer using SIMD intrinsics for bulk field scanning.
56. Implement the Background Compaction Worker with I/O throttling.
57. Optimize B+ tree node layout for CPU cache line alignment (64-byte aligned nodes).
58. Implement prefetch hints for sequential B+ tree leaf scans.
59. Profile memory allocation patterns and tune slab allocator for AHIT nodes.
60. Optimize geospatial index: tune S2 cell levels for query accuracy vs. index size trade-off.
61. Optimize Change Stream Emitter: batch event writes to minimize fsync overhead per event.
62. Run the standard YCSB benchmark suite (Workloads A–F) and compare against RocksDB and SQLite.

Phase 7 — Developer API and Production Hardening (Weeks 52–62)
Deliverable: Production-ready library with JavaScript bindings, documentation, and observability.
63. Implement the JavaScript/Node.js native addon using Neon (Rust → Node.js FFI).
64. Implement the JavaScript Promise API for all async operations.
65. Implement the metrics API and Prometheus HTTP endpoint including new metrics: geospatial query count, change stream utilization, TTL reaper statistics, blob storage metrics.
66. Implement the Hot Backup API (db.backup()).
67. Implement the JSON Schema validator with validationLevel and validationAction support.
68. Implement WASM compilation target for edge computing deployment (using wasm-pack).
69. Implement the C FFI header (libovn.h) for non-Rust language integration.
70. Write comprehensive API documentation with examples for all new features.
71. Write an integration test suite covering all documented API behaviors.
72. Conduct a security audit: fuzz testing, memory safety review, injection attack testing.
73. Write migration guide: documenting feature parity with MongoDB and any behavioral differences.

Phase 8 — Extended Features (Weeks 63–72)
Deliverable: Complete MongoDB feature parity for the target feature set.
74. Implement OVN-Dist distributed extension: Raft leader election, single-leader replication, WAL streaming to followers.
75. Implement distributed change streams: stream events across cluster nodes with consistent ordering.
76. Implement the $search aggregation stage: compound queries, highlight, scoring, facets via full-text index.
77. Implement time-series $densify and $fill aggregation stages for gap-filling in time-series data.
78. Implement database-level transactions (multi-collection): extend MVCC to span multiple collections within a single .ovn file.
79. Implement collection-level encryption: per-collection AES-256-GCM encryption key, key stored in Metadata Segment encrypted with a user-supplied master key.
80. Write end-to-end tests: simulate production workloads including IoT time-series ingestion, e-commerce order processing, geospatial store locator, and real-time analytics dashboards.

Phase Summary

Phase	Weeks	Key Milestone	Risk Level
1 — Storage Engine	1-8	.ovn file read/write, WAL, B+ Tree, Blob stub	Low
2 — Document Encoding	9-14	OBE serializer, compression, Blob storage	Low
3 — Indexing Engine	15-24	AHIT, compound, full-text, fuzzy, autocomplete, geospatial	Medium
4 — Query Engine	25-33	MQL parser, optimizer, aggregation, capped, time-series	High
5 — Concurrency Control	34-42	MVCC, ACID, retryable writes, change streams	High
6 — Performance Optimization	43-51	YCSB benchmarks, SIMD, group commit, geo tuning	Medium
7 — Developer API	52-62	Node.js bindings, WASM, production hardening	Medium
8 — Extended Features	63-72	Distributed, encryption, advanced aggregation	High


Appendix A — Glossary

Term	Definition
ACID	Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability — the four properties of database transactions.
AHIT	Adaptive Hybrid Index Tree — the novel index structure designed for Oblivinx3x.
Autocomplete Index	A compressed radix trie that supports prefix-based token completion for search-as-you-type queries.
B+ Tree	A balanced tree data structure where all data is stored in leaf nodes, connected in a linked list for sequential scan efficiency.
Blob Segment	A dedicated .ovn file segment for storing binary large objects (BLOBs) exceeding the 16MB document size limit, chunked at 255KB boundaries.
Bloom Filter	A probabilistic data structure that tests whether an element is in a set with possible false positives but no false negatives.
BK-tree	Burkhard-Keller tree — a metric tree structure used for fuzzy string matching by Levenshtein edit distance.
Capped Collection	A fixed-size collection that automatically overwrites the oldest documents when the size or document count limit is reached.
Change Stream	A real-time ordered sequence of change events (insert/update/delete/drop) emitted by the Change Stream Emitter after each committed write.
Compaction	The process of merging multiple SSTable files (or MemTable flushes) to reduce read amplification and reclaim space.
GeoJSON	An open standard for encoding geographic data structures (Point, LineString, Polygon, etc.) as JSON.
HNSW	Hierarchical Navigable Small World — a graph-based approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm.
Idempotency Key	A (lsid, txnNumber) pair embedded in WAL records to detect and deduplicate retried write operations.
lsid	Logical Session ID — a 128-bit identifier assigned to a client session, used for retryable writes and change stream cursors.
LSM Tree	Log-Structured Merge-tree — a data structure with excellent write performance that stages writes in memory before merging to disk.
MVCC	Multi-Version Concurrency Control — a technique allowing multiple versions of data to coexist so readers and writers do not block each other.
OBE	OVN Binary Encoding — the document serialization format used by Oblivinx3x.
OVN	Oblivinx Storage Format — the file format used by Oblivinx3x (.ovn extension).
R-tree	A tree data structure used for spatial indexing of multi-dimensional data (used for 2d planar geospatial index).
Resume Token	An opaque token embedded in change stream events that allows a subscriber to restart the stream from the last processed event.
Retryable Write	A write operation that can be safely retried by the driver without risk of duplicate execution, enabled by session-level idempotency keys.
S2 Geometry	A spherical geometry library (developed by Google) that partitions the Earth's surface into a hierarchy of quadrilateral cells for geospatial indexing.
SCO	Skip-Column Optimization — the Oblivinx3x technique for non-leftmost-prefix compound index queries.
SSI	Serializable Snapshot Isolation — a concurrency control protocol achieving full serializability via snapshot isolation with anomaly detection.
SSTable	Sorted String Table — an immutable, sorted file of key-value pairs used in LSM-tree architectures.
Time-Series Collection	A collection type optimized for time-ordered measurements, storing documents in automatic time-based buckets for efficient range queries.
TTL Index	A secondary index with an expireAfterSeconds property that causes the TTL Reaper to automatically delete documents whose indexed time field exceeds the TTL.
TxID	Transaction ID — a monotonically increasing 64-bit integer identifying each write transaction.
validationAction	Collection property controlling what happens on schema validation failure: 'error' rejects the write, 'warn' logs and allows it.
validationLevel	Collection property controlling which documents are validated: 'strict' validates all writes, 'moderate' skips existing non-conforming documents.
WAL	Write-Ahead Log — a durability mechanism where changes are written to a sequential log before being applied to the main data structure.
Working Set	The set of data pages actively accessed by the current workload within a recent time window.
WSE	Working Set Estimator — the Oblivinx3x component that dynamically adjusts Buffer Pool size based on observed working set.


Appendix B — .OVN File Format Quick Reference
File Layout (default 4096-byte pages):

  Page 0    : File Header (magic, version, page size, root pointers, flags)
  Page 1    : Segment Directory (maps segment types to page ranges)
  Page 2-N  : Data Segment (document leaf pages, overflow pages)
  Page N-M  : Index Segment (AHIT B+ tree nodes, SSTable index blocks,
                              inverted index, BK-tree, autocomplete trie,
                              geospatial R-tree / S2 cell index, HNSW graph)
  Page M-P  : WAL Segment (write-ahead log records)
  Page P-Q  : Metadata Segment (collection schemas, statistics, version history,
                                 session registry, idempotency cache)
  Page Q-R  : Blob Segment (chunked binary large objects, Blob Directory B+ tree)
  Page R-S  : Change Stream Log (append-only circular buffer of change events)

Page Header (32 bytes, every page):
  [4B] Page Type | [8B] Page Number | [8B] TxID | [2B] Slot Count
  [2B] Free Space Offset | [4B] Right Sibling | [4B] CRC32

OBE Document (variable length):
  [4B] Total Length | [16B] Document ID | [8B] TxID | [1B] Tombstone
  [varint] Field Count | [Field...] (Field Name/ID + Type Tag + Value)

WAL Record (variable length):
  [4B] Record Type | [8B] TxID | [4B] Collection ID
  [16B] lsid (session ID, zeroed if not retryable) | [8B] txnNumber
  [varint] Document Length | [Document Bytes] | [4B] CRC32

Change Stream Event (variable length):
  [8B] TxID | [4B] Collection ID | [1B] Operation Type
  [16B] Document ID | [varint] Pre-image Length | [Pre-image OBE]
  [varint] Post-image Length | [Post-image OBE]


Appendix C — Supported MQL Operators

Category	Operators
Comparison	$eq, $ne, $gt, $gte, $lt, $lte, $in, $nin
Logical	$and, $or, $not, $nor
Array	$all, $elemMatch, $size
Element	$exists, $type
Evaluation	$regex, $where (sandboxed), $expr
Geospatial	$near, $nearSphere, $geoWithin, $geoIntersects, $centerSphere, $box, $polygon, $geometry
Text Search	$text (with $search, $language, $caseSensitive, $diacriticSensitive, $fuzzy)
Bitwise	$bitsAllSet, $bitsAnySet, $bitsAllClear, $bitsAnyClear
Update — Field	$set, $unset, $inc, $mul, $rename, $min, $max, $currentDate, $setOnInsert
Update — Array	$push, $pull, $addToSet, $pop, $pullAll, $each, $position, $sort, $slice
Aggregation	$match, $group, $project, $sort, $limit, $skip, $unwind, $lookup,
		$count, $out, $facet, $bucket, $bucketAuto, $setWindowFields,
		$merge, $replaceRoot, $replaceWith, $densify, $fill,
		$unionWith, $sortByCount, $sample
Aggregation Accumulators	$sum, $avg, $min, $max, $first, $last, $push, $addToSet,
			$stdDevPop, $stdDevSamp, $mergeObjects, $accumulator,
			$percentile, $median, $rank, $denseRank, $documentNumber,
			$shift, $expMovingAvg, $integral, $derivative
Window Operators	$sum, $avg, $min, $max, $first, $last, $rank, $denseRank,
		$documentNumber, $shift, $expMovingAvg, $integral, $derivative
		(within $setWindowFields output stage)